Introduction
This chapter presents information on IFR helicopter
operations in the National Airspace System. Advances in
avionics technology installed in helicopters such as Global
Positioning System (GPS) and Wide Area Augmentation
System (WAAS) are bringing approach procedures to
heliports around the country.
The ability to operate helicopters under IFR increases
their utility and safety. Helicopter IFR operators have
an excellent safety record due to the investment in
IFR-equipped helicopters, development of instrument
approach procedures (IAPs), and IFR-trained flight crews.
The safety record of IFR operations in the Gulf of Mexico is
equivalent to the safety record of the best-rated airlines.
Manufacturers are working to increase IFR all-weather
capabilities of helicopters by providing slower minimum
instrument airspeeds (VMINI), faster cruising speeds, and
better autopilots and flight management systems (FMS).
As a result, in October 2005, the first civil helicopter in
the United States was certified for flight into known icing
conditions. [Figure 7-1]
Helicopter Instrument
Procedures

Figure 7-1. Icing tests. To safely provide an all-weather capability
and flight into known icing conditions that would otherwise delay
or cancel winter flight operations, the digital control of the S-92
Rotor Ice Protection System (RIPS) determines the temperature and
moisture content of the air and removes any ice buildup by heating the
main and tail rotor blades. The system is shown here during testing.
Helicopter Instrument Flight Rule (IFR)
Certification
It is very important that pilots be familiar with the IFR
requirements for their particular helicopter. Within the
same make, model, and series of helicopter, variations in
the installed avionics may change the required equipment
or the level of augmentation for a particular operation. The
Automatic Flight Control System/Autopilot/Flight Director
(AFCS/AP/FD) equipment installed in IFR helicopters can
be very complex. For some helicopters, the AFCS/AP/
FD complexity requires formal training in order for the
pilot(s) to obtain and maintain a high level of knowledge
of system operation, limitations, failure indications, and
reversionary modes. For a helicopter to be certified
to conduct operations in instrument meteorological
conditions (IMC), it must meet the design and installation
requirements of Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations (14
CFR) Part 27, Appendix B (Normal Category) and Part 29,
Appendix B (Transport Category), which is in addition to
the visual flight rule (VFR) requirements.
These requirements are broken down into the
following categories: flight and navigation equipment,
miscellaneous requirements, stability, helicopter flight
manual limitations, operations specifications, and
minimum equipment list (MEL).
Flight and Navigation Equipment
The basic installed flight and navigation equipment for
helicopter IFR operations is listed under 14 CFR Part 29, §
29.1303, with amendments and additions in Appendix B of
14 CFR Parts 27 and 29 under which they are certified. The
list includes:
Clock
Airspeed indicator
Sensitive altimeter (A “sensitive” altimeter relates to
the instrument’s displayed change in altitude over
its range. For “Copter” Category (CAT) II operations,
the scale must be in 20-foot intervals.) adjustable
for barometric pressure.
Magnetic direction indicator
Free-air temperature indicator
Rate-of-climb (vertical speed) indicator
Magnetic gyroscopic direction indicator
Stand-by bank and pitch (attitude) indicator
Non-tumbling gyroscopic bank and pitch (attitude)
indicator
Speed warning device (if required by 14 CFR Part 29)
Miscellaneous Requirements
Overvoltage disconnect
Instrument power source indicator
Adequate ice protection of IFR systems
Alternate static source (single-pilot configuration)
Thunderstorm lights (transport category helicopters)
Stabilization and Automatic Flight Control
System (AFCS)
Helicopter manufacturers normally use a combination
of a stabilization and/or AFCS in order to meet the IFR
stability requirements of 14 CFR Parts 27 and 29. These
systems include:
Aerodynamic surfaces, which impart some stability
or control capability that generally is not found in
the basic VFR configuration.
Trim systems provide a cyclic centering effect. These
systems typically involve a magnetic brake/spring
device and may be controlled by a four-way switch
on the cyclic. This system requires “hands on” flying
of the helicopter.
Stability Augmentation Systems (SAS) provide
short-term rate damping control inputs to increase
helicopter stability. Like trim systems, SAS requires
“hands-on” flying.

Attitude Retention Systems (ATT) return the
helicopter to a selected attitude after a disturbance.
Changes in attitude can be accomplished usually
through a four- way “beep” switch or by actuating a
“force trim” switch on the cyclic, which sets the desired
attitude manually. Attitude retention may be a SAS
function or may be the basic “hands off” autopilot
function.
Autopilot Systems (APs) provide for “hands off”
flight along specified lateral and vertical paths. The
functional modes may include heading, altitude,
vertical speed, navigation tracking, and approach.
APs typically have a control panel for mode selection
and indication of mode status. APs may or may not be
installed with an associated FD. APs typically control
the helicopter about the roll and pitch axes (cyclic
control) but may also include yaw axis (pedal control)
and collective control servos.
Flight Directors (FDs) provide visual guidance to
the pilot to fly selected lateral and vertical modes of
operation. The visual guidance is typically provided
by a “single cue,” commonly known as a “vee bar,”
which provides the indicated attitude to fly and
is superimposed on the attitude indicator. Other
FDs may use a “two cue” presentation known as a
“cross pointer system.” These two presentations
only provide attitude information. A third system,
known as a “three cue” system, provides information
to position the collective as well as attitude (roll
and pitch) cues. The collective control cue system
identifies and cues the pilot what collective control
inputs to use when path errors are produced or when
airspeed errors exceed preset values. The three-cue
system pitch command provides the required cues
to control airspeed when flying an approach with
vertical guidance at speeds slower than the best-
rate-of-climb (BROC) speed. The pilot manipulates
the helicopter’s controls to satisfy these commands,
yielding the desired flightpath or may couple the
autopilot to the FD to fly along the desired flightpath.
Typically, FD mode control and indication are shared
with the autopilot. Pilots must be aware of the mode
of operation of the augmentation systems and the
control logic and functions in use. For example, on an
instrument landing system (ILS) approach and using
the three-cue mode (lateral, vertical, and collective
cues), the FD collective cue responds to glideslope
deviation, while the horizontal bar cue of the “cross­
pointer” responds to airspeed deviations. However,
the same system when operated in the two-cue
mode on an ILS, the FD horizontal bar cue responds
to glideslope deviations. The need to be aware of the
FD mode of operation is particularly significant when
operating using two pilots.
Pilots should have an established set of procedures and
responsibilities for the control of FD/AP modes for the
various phases of flight. Not only does a full understanding
of the system modes provide for a higher degree of
accuracy in control of the helicopter, it is the basis for crew
identification of a faulty system.
Helicopter Flight Manual Limitations
Helicopters are certificated for IFR operations with either
one or two pilots. Certain equipment is required to be
installed and functional for two-pilot operations and
additional equipment is required for single-pilot operation.
In addition, the Helicopter Flight Manual (HFM) defines
systems and functions that are required to be in operation
or engaged for IFR flight in either the single or two-pilot
configurations. Often, in a two-pilot operation, this level of
augmentation is less than the full capability of the installed
systems. Likewise, a single-pilot operation may require a
higher level of augmentation.
The HFM also identifies other specific limitations associated
with IFR flight. Typically, these limitations include, but are
not limited to:
Minimum equipment required for IFR flight (in some
cases, for both single-pilot and two-pilot operations)
VMINI (minimum speed—IFR) [Figure 7-2]
VNEI (never exceed speed—IFR)
Maximum approach angle
Weight and center of gravity (CG) limits
Helicopter configuration limitations (such as door
positions and external loads)
Helicopter system limitations (generators, inverters,
etc.)
System testing requirements (many avionics and AFCS,
AP, and FD systems incorporate a self-test feature)
Pilot action requirements (for example, the pilot must
have hands and feet on the controls during certain
operations, such as an instrument approach below
certain altitudes)
Final approach angles/descent gradient for public
approach procedures can be as high as 7.5 degrees/795
ft/NM. At 70 knots indicated airspeed (KIAS) (no wind),
this equates to a descent rate of 925 fpm. With a 10-knot
tailwind, the descent rate increases to 1,056 fpm. “Copter”
Point-in-space (PinS) approach procedures are restricted
to helicopters with a maximum VMINI of 70 KIAS and an
IFR approach angle that enables them to meet the final
approach angle/descent gradient. Pilots of helicopters with

Augusta
A-109C
Bell
BH 214ST
BH 222B
Eurocopter
Sikorsky
S-76A
S-76A
S-76B
S-76C
SK-76C++
NOTE: The VMINI, MAX IFR Approach Angle and G/A Mode Speed for a specific helicopter may vary with avionics/autopilot installation.
Pilots are, therefore, cautioned to refer only to the Rotorcraft Flight Manual limitations for their specific helicopter. The maximum rate of
descent for many autopilots is 1,000 FPM.
LEGEND
In some helicopters with the autopilot engaged, the VMINI may increase to a speed greater than 70 KIAS, or in the “go around”
mode requires a speed faster than 70 KIAS.
SAMPLE NOT FOR ACTUAL USE
VMINI Limitations
MAX IFR Approach Angle
G/A Mode Speed
Manufacturer
75 KIAS
75 KIAS
75 KIAS
60 (80 coupled)
50 (65 coupled)
45 (70 coupled)
60 (AFCS Phase II)
50 (AFCS Phase III)
50 (60 coupled)
Figure 7-2. VMINI limitations, maximum IFR approach angles and G/A mode speeds for selected IFR certified helicopters.
a VMINI of 70 KIAS may have inadequate control margins
to fly an approach that is designed with the maximum
allowable angle/descent gradient or minimum allowable
deceleration distance from the missed approach point
(MAP) to the heliport. The “Copter” PinS final approach
segment is limited to 70 KIAS since turn containment and
the deceleration distance from the MAP to the heliport may
not be adequate at faster speeds. For some helicopters,
engaging the autopilot may increase the VMINI to a speed
greater than 70 KIAS, or in the “go around” (G/A) mode,
require a speed faster than 70 KIAS. [Figure 7-2] It may be
possible for these helicopters to be flown manually on the
approach or on the missed approach in a mode other than
the G/A mode.
Since slower IFR approach speeds enable the helicopter
to fly steeper approaches and reduces the distance from
the heliport that is required to decelerate the helicopter,
you may want to operate your helicopter at speeds slower
than its established VMINI. The provision to apply for a
determination of equivalent safety for instrument flight
below VMINI and the minimum helicopter requirements
are specified in Advisory Circulars (AC) 27-1, Certification
of Normal Category Rotorcraft and AC 29-2, Certification
of Transport Category Rotorcraft. Application guidance is
available from the Rotorcraft Directorate Standards Staff,
ASW-110, 2601 Meacham Blvd., Fort Worth, Texas, 76137­
4298, (817) 222-5111.
Performance data may not be available in the HFM for
speeds other than the best rate of climb speed. To meet
missed approach climb gradients, pilots may use observed
performance for similar weight, altitude, temperature, and
speed conditions to determine equivalent performance.
When missed approaches utilizing a climbing turn are
flown with an autopilot, set the heading bug on the
missed approach heading, and then at the MAP, engage
the indicated airspeed mode, followed immediately by
applying climb power and selecting the heading mode.
This is important since the autopilot roll rate and maximum

bank angle in the Heading Select mode are significantly
more robust than in the NAV mode. Figure 7-3 represents
the bank angle and roll limits of the S76 used by the FAA for
flight testing. It has a roll rate in the Heading Select mode
of 5 degrees per second with only 1 degree per second in
the NAV mode. The bank angle in the Heading Select mode
is 20 degrees, with only 17 degrees in the NAV Change
Over mode. Furthermore, if the Airspeed Hold mode is
not selected on some autopilots when commencing the
missed approach, the helicopter accelerates in level flight
until the best rate of climb is attained, and only then will
a climb begin.
Figure 7-3. Autopilot bank angle and roll rate limits for the S-76
used by the William J. Hughes Technical Center for Flight Tests.
Heading hold
VOR/RNAV
(Capture)
VOR/RNAV
(On Course)
Heading Select
VOR/RNAV
(Course Change
Over Station/Fix)
<6
+/–22
+/–13
+/–20
+/–17
None specified
5 VOR/RNAV Approach
Bank Angle Limit
(Degrees)
Roll Rate Limit
(Degrees/Sec)
Autopilot
Mode
SAMPLE NOT FOR ACTUAL USE
WAAS localizer performance (LP) lateral-only PinS testing
conducted in 2005 by the FAA at the William J. Hughes
Technical Center in New Jersey for helicopter PinS also
captured the flight tracks for turning missed approaches.
[Figure 7-4] The large flight tracks that resulted during
the turning missed approach were attributed in part to
operating the autopilot in the NAV mode and exceeding
the 70 KIAS limit.
Operations Specifications
A flight operated under 14 CFR Part 135 has minimums and
procedures more restrictive than a flight operated under
14 CFR Part 91. These Part 135 requirements are detailed
in their operations specifications (OpSpecs). Helicopter Air
Ambulance (HAA) operators have even more restrictive
OpSpecs. Shown in Figure 7-5 is an excerpt from an
OpSpecs detailing the minimums for precision approaches.
The inlay in Figure 7-5 shows the minimums for the ILS
Runway 3R approach at Detroit Metro Airport. With all
lighting operative, the minimums for helicopter Part 91
operations are a 200-foot ceiling, and 1,200-feet runway
visual range (RVR) - one-half airplane Category A visibility
but no less than 1⁄4 SM/1,200 RVR. However, as shown in
Figure 7-4. Flight tests at the William J. Hughes Technical Center
point out the importance of airspeed control and using the correct
technique to make a turning missed approach.
MAP
1000 ft.
2000 ft.
3000 ft.
4000 ft.
5000 ft.
6000 ft.
7000 ft.
8000 ft.
Distance from MAP
×
×
×
×
×
×
×
×
×
×
×
×
Bin Mean
Bin Maximum
Approach Tracks
Legend
×
the OpSpecs, the minimum visibility this Part 135 operator
must adhere to is 1,600 RVR. Pilots operating under 14 CFR
Part 91 are encouraged to develop their own personal
OpSpecs based on their own equipment, training, and
experience.
Minimum Equipment List (MEL)
A helicopter operating under 14 CFR Part 135 with
certain installed equipment inoperative is prohibited
from taking off unless the operation is authorized in the
approved MEL. The MEL provides for some equipment to
be inoperative if certain conditions are met. [Figure 7-6]
In many cases, a helicopter configured for single-pilot
IFR may depart IFR with certain equipment inoperative
provided a crew of two pilots is used. Under 14 CFR Part
91, a pilot may defer certain items without an MEL if
those items are not required by the type certificate, CFRs,
or airworthiness directives (ADs), and the flight can be
performed safely without them. If the item is disabled,
removed, or marked inoperative, a logbook entry is made.
Pilot Proficiency
Helicopters of the same make and model may have
variations in installed avionics that change the required
equipment or the level of augmentation for a particular
operation. The complexity of modern AFCS, AP, and FD
systems requires a high degree of understanding to safely

SAMPLE NOT FOR ACTUAL USE
U.S. Department
of Transportation
Federal Aviation
Operations Specifications
Administration
Print Date: 4/16/2008
H117.
Straight-in Category I Precision Instrument Approach
HQ Control:
11/22/00
Procedures - All Airports
HQ Revision:
a.
Except as provided in this paragraph, the certificate holder shall not use any Category I IFR landing
minimum lower than that prescribed by any applicable published instrument approach procedure. The
IFR landing minimums prescribed in this paragraph are the lowest authorized (other than Airborne
Radar approaches) for use at any airport. Provided that the fastest approach speed used in the final
approach segment is less than 91 knots, the certificate holder is authorized to conduct straight-in
precision instrument approach procedures using the following:
(1) The published Category A minimum descent altitude (MDA) or decision height (DH), as
appropriate.
(2) One-half of the published Category A visibility/RVR minimum or the visibility/RVR minimums
prescribed by this paragraph, whichever is higher.
b.
Straight-In Category I Precision Approach Procedures. The certificate holder shall not use an IFR
landing minimum for straight-in precision approach procedures lower than that specified in the
following table. Touchdown zone RVR reports, when available for a particular runway, are controlling
for all approaches to and landings on that runway. (See NOTE 2.)
Precision Approaches
Full ILS (See NOTE 1), MLS, or PAR
Approach Light
Configuration
HAT
Helicopters Operated at
Speeds of 90 Knots or Less
Helicopters Operated at
Speeds More Than 90 Knots
Visibility In
SM.
TDZ RVR
In Feet
Visibility In
SM.
TDZ RVR In
Feet
No Lights or ODALS or
MALS or SSALS
MALSR or SSALR or
MALSR with TDZ and
CL or SSALR with TDZ
and CL or ALSF-1/ALSF-
2 with TDZ and CL
NOTE 1: A full ILS requires an operative LOC, GS, and OM or FAF. A precision or surveillance radar
fix, an NDB, VOR, DME fix, or a published minimum GSIA fix may be used in lieu of an outer marker.
NOTE 2: The Mid RVR and Rollout RVR reports (if available) provide advisory information to pilots.
The Mid RVR report may be substituted for the TDZ RVR report if the TDZ RVR report is not available.
c.
Special Limitations and Provisions for Instrument Approach Procedures at Foreign Airports. If the
certificate holder is authorized operations at foreign airports, the following criteria apply.
(1) Foreign approach lighting systems equivalent to U.S. standards are authorized for both precision
and nonprecision approaches. Sequenced flashing lights are not required when determining the
equivalence of a foreign lighting system to U.S. standards.
(2) For straight-in landing minimums at foreign airports where an MDA or DH is not specified, the
lowest authorized MDA or DH shall be obtained as follows:
SAMPLE NOT FOR ACTUAL USE
SAMPLE NOT FOR ACTUAL USE
Figure 7-5. Operations Specifications.

U.S. DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION
MASTER MINIMUM EQUIPMENT LIST
FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION
AIRCRAFT:
BH-206/407 SERIES
REVISION NO: 3
DATE: 12/22/2008
PAGE:
1.
2. NUMBER INSTALLED
3. NUMBER REQUIRED FOR DISPATCH
SYSTEM &
SEQUENCE
NUMBERS
ITEM
4. REMARKS OR EXCEPTIONS
28 FUEL
1.
Fuel Quantity Gauge
DELETED.
|
2.
***
Auxiliary Fuel Tank
D
-
May be inoperative provided:
a) Flight is not predicated upon
the use of the system,
and
b) Auxiliary tank fuel is
considered in weight and
balance computations.
3.
Fuel Low Warning Caution
Light System(206A and
206B only)
DELETED.
|
|
|
only)
DELETED.
|
|
4.
***
Solenoid Drain Valve
System
D
-
(O) May be inoperative provided the
manual drain valve is verified
closed prior to flight.
5.
Fuel Boost Pump(Twin
engine models only)
B
One aft boost pump may be
inoperative.
6.
Fuel Flow Indicator
(Twin engine models
only)
B
SAMPLE NOT FOR ACTUAL USE
Figure 7-6. Example of a Minimum Equipment List (MEL).

and efficiently control the helicopter in IFR operations.
Formal training in the use of these systems is highly
recommended for all pilots.
During flight operations, you must be aware of the mode
of operation of the augmentation system and the control
logic and functions employed. [Figure 7-2]
Helicopter VFR Minimums
Helicopters have the same VFR minimums as airplanes
with two exceptions. In Class G airspace or under a special
visual flight rule (SVFR) clearance, helicopters have no
minimum visibility requirement but must remain clear of
clouds and operate at a speed that is slow enough to give
the pilot an adequate opportunity to see other aircraft or an
obstruction in time to avoid a collision. Helicopters are also
authorized (14 CFR Part 91, appendix D, § 3) to obtain SVFR
clearances at airports with the designation NO SVFR on the
sectional chart or in the Chart Supplement (CS). Figure 7-7
shows the visibility and cloud clearance requirements for
VFR and SVFR. However, lower minimums associated with
Class G airspace and SVFR do not take the place of the VFR
minimum requirements of either Part 135 regulations or
respective OpSpecs.
Knowledge of all VFR minimums is required in order to
determine if a PinS approach can be conducted or if a SVFR
clearance is required to continue past the (MAP). These
approaches and procedures are discussed in detail later.
Helicopter IFR Takeoff Minimums
14 CFR Part 91 imposes no takeoff minimums on the
helicopter pilot. However, Rotorcraft Flight Manuals
may require the helicopter to attain at least Vmini before
entering IMC. For most helicopters, this requires a distance
of approximately 1⁄2 mile and an altitude of 100 feet. If
departing with a steeper climb gradient, some helicopters
may require additional altitude to accelerate to VMINI.
To maximize safety, always consider using the Part 135
operator standard takeoff visibility minimum of 1⁄2 statute
mile (SM) or the charted departure minima, whichever is
higher. A charted departure that provides protection from
obstacles has either a higher visibility requirement, climb
gradient, and/or departure path. Part 135 operators are
required to adhere to the takeoff minimums prescribed in
the instrument approach procedures (IAPs) for the airport.
Helicopter IFR Alternates
The pilot must file for an alternate if weather reports and
forecasts at the proposed destination do not meet certain
minimums. These minimums differ for Part 91 and Part
135 operators.
Figure 7-7. Helicopter VFR minimums.
Airspace
Class A
Class B
Class C
Class D
Class E
Less than
10,000 feet MSL
At or above
10,000 feet MSL
Class G
1,200 feet or less
above the surface
(regardless of MSL altitude)
Day, except as provided
in §91.155(b)
Night, except as provided
in §91.155(b)
More than 1,200 feet above
the surface but less than
10,000 feet MSL
Day
Night
More than 1,200 feet
above the surface and at
or above 10,000 feet MSL
B, C, D, E, Surface Area
Airspace SVFR Minimums
Day
Night
Flight
visibility
Not
applicable
3 SM
3 SM
3 SM
3 SM
5 SM
1/2 SM
None
1 SM
3 SM
5 SM
None
None
Distance from clouds
Not applicable
Clear of clouds
500 feet below
1,000 feet above
2,000 feet horizontal
500 feet below
1,000 feet above
2,000 feet horizontal
500 feet below
1,000 feet above
2,000 feet horizontal
1,000 feet below
1,000 feet above
1 statue mile horizontal
Clear of clouds
Clear of clouds
500 feet below
1,000 feet above
2,000 feet horizontal
500 feet below
1,000 feet above
2,000 feet horizontal
1,000 feet below
1,000 feet above
1 statute mile horizontal
Clear of clouds
Clear of clouds
Helicopter VFR Minimums
Part 91 Operators
Part 91 operators are not required to file an alternate if, at
the estimated time of arrival (ETA) and for 1 hour after, the
ceiling is at least 1,000 feet above the airport elevation or
400 feet above the lowest applicable approach minima,
whichever is higher, and the visibility is at least 2 SM. If an
alternate is required, an airport can be used if the ceiling is
at least 200 feet above the minimum for the approach to

be flown and visibility is at least 1 SM, but never less than
the minimum required for the approach to be flown. If no
instrument approach procedure has been published for the
alternate airport, the ceiling and visibility minima are those
allowing descent from the MEA, approach, and landing
under basic VFR.
Part 135 Operators
Part 135 operators are not required to file an alternate if,
for at least one hour before and one hour after the ETA,
the ceiling is at least 1,500 feet above the lowest circling
approach minimum descent altitude (MDA). If a circling
instrument approach is not authorized for the airport,
the ceiling must be at least 1,500 feet above the lowest
published minimum or 2,000 feet above the airport
elevation, whichever is higher. For the IAP to be used at
the destination airport, the forecasted visibility for that
airport must be at least 3 SM or 2 SM more than the lowest
applicable visibility minimums, whichever is greater.
Alternate landing minimums for flights conducted under 14
CFR Part 135 are described in the OpSpecs for that
operation. All helicopters operated under IFR must carry
enough fuel to fly to the intended destination, fly from that
airport to the filed alternate, if required, and continue for
30 minutes at normal cruising speed.
Helicopter Instrument Approaches
Many new helicopter IAPs have been developed to take
advantage of advances in both avionics and helicopter
technology.
Standard Instrument Approach Procedures to
an Airport
Helicopters flying standard instrument approach
procedures (SIAP) must adhere to the MDA or decision
altitude for Category A airplanes and may apply the 14
b) (1)
“Copter procedures” means helicopter procedures
with applicable minimums as prescribed in §97.35
of this part. Helicopters may also use other
procedures prescribed in Subpart C of this part and
may use the Category A minimum descent altitude
(MDA) or decision height (DH). The required visibility
minimum may be reduced to ½ the published
visibility minimum, but in no case may it be reduced
to less than one-quarter mile or 1,200 feet RVR.
97.3 Symbols and Terms Used in Procedures
Figure 7-8. Part 97 excerpt.
CFR Part 97.3 (d-1) rule to reduce the airplane Category A
visibility by half but in no case less than 1⁄4 SM or 1,200 RVR.
[Figure 7-8] The approach can be initiated at any speed up
to the highest approach category authorized; however, the
speed on the final approach segment must be reduced to
the Category A speed of less than 90 KIAS before the MAP in
order to apply the visibility reduction. A constant airspeed
is recommended on the final approach segment to comply
with the stabilized approach concept since a decelerating
approach may make early detection of wind shear on the
approach path more difficult. [Figure 7-9]
When visibility minimums must be increased for inoperative
components or visual aids, use the Inoperative Components
and Visual Aids Table (provided in the front cover of the U.S.
Terminal Procedures) to derive the Category A minima before
applying any visibility reduction. The published visibility
may be increased above the standard visibility minima due
to penetrations of the 20:1 and 34:1 final approach obstacle
identification surfaces (OIS). The minimum visibility required
for 34:1 penetrations is 3⁄4 SM and for 20:1 penetrations 1
SM, which is discussed in chapter 5 of this handbook. When
there are penetrations of the final approach OIS, a visibility
credit for approach lighting systems is not allowed for
either airplane or helicopter procedures that would result
Figure 7-9. Helicopter use of standard instrument approach procedures.
Procedure
Standard
Copter Procedure
GPS Copter Procedure
Helicopter Visibility Minima
The greater of: one half the
Category A visibility minima,
¼ statute mile visibility or
1,200 RVR unless annotated
(Visibility Reduction by
Helicopters NA.)
As published
As published
Helicopter MDA/DA
As published for
Category A
As published
As published
Maximum Speed Limitations
The helicopter may initiate the final approach
segment at speeds up to the upper limit of the
highest Approach Category authorized by the
procedure, but must be slowed to no more
than 90 KIAS at the MAP in order to apply the
visibility reduction.
90 KIAS when on a published route/track.
90 KIAS when on a published route, track, or
holding, 70 KIAS when on the final approach
or missed approach segment. Military procedures
are limited to 90 KIAS for all segments.
Helicopter Use of Standard Instrument Approach Procedures

in values less than the appropriate 3⁄4 SM or 1 SM visibility
requirement. The 14 CFR Part 97.3 visibility reduction rule
does not apply, and you must take precautions to avoid
any obstacles in the visual segment. Procedures with
penetrations of the final approach OIS are annotated at the
next amendment with “Visibility Reduction by Helicopters
NA.”
Until all the affected SIAPs have been annotated, an
understanding of how the standard visibilities are
established is the best aid in determining if penetrations
of the final approach OIS exists. Some of the variables in
determining visibilities are: decision altitude (DA)/MDA
height above touchdown (HAT), height above airport
(HAA), distance of the facility to the MAP (or the runway
threshold for non- precision approaches), and approach
lighting configurations.
The standard visibility requirement, without any credit
for lights, is 1 SM for non-precision approaches and 3⁄4
SM for precision approaches. This is based on a Category
A airplane 250–320 feet HAT/HAA; for non-precision
approaches a distance of 10,000 feet or less from the
facility to the MAP (or runway threshold). For precision
approaches, credit for any approach light configuration; for
non-precision approaches (with a 250 HAT) configured with
a Medium Intensity Approach Lighting System (MALSR),
Simplified Short Approach Lighting System (SSALR), or
Approach Lighting System With Sequenced Flashing Lights
(ALSF)-1 normally results in a published visibility of 1⁄2 SM.
Consequently, if an ILS is configured with approach lights
or a non-precision approach is configured with MALSR,
SSALR, or ALSF-1 lighting configurations and the procedure
has a published visibility of 3⁄4 SM or greater, a penetration
of the final approach OIS may exist. Also, pilots are unable
to determine whether there are penetrations of the final
approach OIS if a non-precision procedure does not have
approach lights or is configured with ODALS, MALS, or
SSALS/SALS lighting since the minimum published visibility
is 3⁄4 SM or greater.
As a rule of thumb, approaches with published visibilities of
3⁄4 SM or more should be regarded as having final approach
OIS penetrations and care must be taken to avoid any
obstacles in the visual segment.
Approaches with published visibilities of 1⁄2 SM or less are
free of OIS penetrations and the visibility reduction in Part
97.3 is authorized.
Copter Only Approaches to An Airport or
Heliport
Pilots flying Copter SIAPs, other than GPS, may use the
published minima with no reductions in visibility allowed.
The maximum airspeed is 90 KIAS on any segment of the
approach or missed approach. Figure 7-10 illustrates the
COPTER ILS or LOC RWY 13 approach at NewYork/La Guardia
(LGA) airport.
Copter ILS approaches to Category (CAT) I facilities with
DAs no lower than a 200-foot HAT provide an advantage
over a conventional ILS of shorter final segments and lower
minimums (based on the 20:1 missed approach surface).
There are also Copter approaches with minimums as low as
100-foot HAT and 1⁄4 SM visibility. Approaches with a HAT
below 200 feet are annotated with the note: “Special Aircrew
& Aircraft Certification Required” since the FAA must approve
the helicopter and its avionics, and the flight crew must have
the required experience, training, and checking.
The ground facilities (approach lighting, signal in space, hold
lines, maintenance, etc.) and air traffic infrastructure for CAT
II ILS approaches are required to support these procedures.
The helicopter must be equipped with an AP, FD, or head
up guidance system, alternate static source (or heated static
source), and radio altimeter. The pilot must have at least a
private pilot helicopter certificate, an instrument helicopter
rating, and a type rating if the helicopter requires a type
rating. Pilot experience requires the following flight times:
250 pilot in command (PIC), 100 helicopter PIC, 50 night
PIC, 75 hours of actual or simulated instrument flight time,
including at least 25 hours of actual or simulated instrument
flight time in a helicopter or a helicopter flight simulator, and
the appropriate recent experience, training and check. For
Copter CAT II ILS operations below 200 feet HAT, approach
deviations are limited to 1⁄4 scale of the localizer or glide
slope needle. Deviations beyond that require an immediate
missed approach unless the pilot has at least one of the visual
references in sight and otherwise meets the requirements of
14 CFR Part 91.175(c). The reward for this effort is the ability
to fly Copter ILS approaches with minima that are sometimes
below the airplane CAT II minima. The procedure to apply for
this certification is available from your local Flight Standards
District Office (FSDO).
Copter GPS Approaches to an Airport or
Heliport
Pilots flying Copter GPS or WAAS SIAPs must limit the speed
to 90 KIAS on the initial and intermediate segment of the
approach and to no more than 70 KIAS on the final and
missed approach segments. If annotated, holding may also
be limited to 90 KIAS to contain the helicopter within the
small airspace provided for helicopter holding patterns.

Figure 7-10. The COPTER ILS or LOC RWY 13 approach at New York/La Guardia (LGA) airport.

Figure 7-11. COPTER RNAV (GPS) 291° at Indianapolis Downtown Heliport.

400 feet/NM (standard)
200 feet/NM (standard)
20:1 OCS
40:1 OCS
During testing for helicopter holding, the optimum
airspeed and leg length combination was determined to
be 90 KIAS with a 3 NM outbound leg length. Consideration
was given to the wind drift on the dead reckoning entry
leg at slower speeds, the turn radius at faster airspeeds,
and the ability of the helicopter in strong wind conditions
to intercept the inbound course prior to the holding fix.
The published minimums are to be used with no visibility
reductions allowed. Figure 7-11 is an example of a Copter
GPS PinS approach that allows the helicopter to fly VFR
from the MAP to the heliport.
The final and missed approach protected airspace providing
obstacle and terrain avoidance is based on 70 KIAS, with
a maximum 10-knot tailwind component. It is absolutely
essential that pilots adhere to the 70 KIAS limitation
in procedures that include an immediate climbing
and turning missed approach. Exceeding the airspeed
restriction increases the turning radius significantly and
can cause the helicopter to leave the missed approach
protected airspace. This may result in controlled flight into
terrain (CFIT) or obstacles.
If a helicopter has a VMINI greater than 70 knots, then
it is not capable of conducting this type of approach.
Similarly, if the autopilot in “go-around” mode climbs at a
VYI greater than 70 knots, then that mode cannot be used.
It is the responsibility of the pilot to determine compliance
with missed approach climb gradient requirements
when operating at speeds other than VY or VYI. Missed
approaches that specify an “IMMEDIATE CLIMBING TURN”
have no provision for a straight ahead climbing segment
before turning. A straight segment results in exceeding the
protected airspace limits.
Protected obstacle clearance areas and surfaces for the
missed approach are established on the assumption that
the missed approach is initiated at the DA point and for
non-precision approaches no lower than the MDA at the
MAP (normally at the threshold of the approach end of
the runway). The pilot must begin the missed approach at
those points. Flying beyond either point before beginning
the missed approach results in flying below the protected
obstacle clearance surface (OCS) and can result in a collision
with an obstacle.
The missed approach segment U.S. Standard for Terminal
Instrument Procedures (TERPS) criteria for all Copter
approaches take advantage of the helicopter’s climb
capabilities at slow airspeeds, resulting in high climb
gradients. [Figure 7-12] The OCS used to evaluate the
missed approach is a 20:1 inclined plane. This surface is
twice as steep for the helicopter as the OCS used to evaluate
the airplane missed approach segment. The helicopter
climb gradient is, therefore, required to be double that of
the airplane’s required missed approach climb gradient.
A minimum climb gradient of at least 400 ft/NM is required
unless a higher gradient is published on the approach
chart (e.g., a helicopter with a ground speed of 70 knots
is required to climb at a rate of 467 fpm (467 fpm = 70
KIAS × 400 feet per NM/60 seconds)). The advantage of
using the 20:1 OCS for the helicopter missed approach
20:1 versus 40:1 Obstacle clearance surface (OCS) for nonprecision missed approach procedures
MAP
96 feet/NM
48 feet/NM
The Copter 20:1 OCS provides for a lower MDA for the helicopter than for the airplane if the controlling
obstacle is in the missed approach area. A climb gradient of 400 feet/NM will allow a required
obstacle clearance (ROC) of 96 feet/NM for each NM of flightpath.
Figure 7-12. Obstacle clearance surface (OCS).

segment instead of the 40:1 OCS used for the airplane is
that obstacles that penetrate the 40:1 missed approach
segment may not have to be considered. The result is
the DA/MDA may be lower for helicopters than for other
aircraft. The minimum required climb gradient of 400 ft/
NM for the helicopter in a missed approach provides 96
feet of required obstacle clearance (ROC) for each NM of
flightpath.
Helicopter Approaches to VFR Heliports
Helicopter approaches to VFR heliports are normally
developed either as public procedures to a PinS that may
serve more than one heliport or as a special procedure to
a specific VFR heliport that requires pilot training due to its
unique characteristics. These approaches can be developed
using very high frequency omni-directional range (VOR)
or automatic direction finder (ADF), but area navigation
(RNAV) using GPS is the most common system used today.
RNAV using the WAAS offers the most advantages because
it can provide lower approach minimums, narrower route
widths to support a network of approaches, and may
allow the heliport to be used as an alternate. A majority
of the special procedures to a specific VFR heliport are
developed in support of HAA operators and have a “Proceed
Visually” segment between the MAP and the heliport.
Public procedures are developed as a PinS approach with a
“Proceed VFR” segment between the MAP and the landing
area. These PinS “Proceed VFR” procedures specify a course
and distance from the MAP to the available heliports in the
area.
Approach to a PinS
The note associated with these procedures is: “PROCEED
VFR FROM (NAMED MAP) OR CONDUCT THE SPECIFIED
MISSED APPROACH.” They may be developed as a special
or public procedure where the MAP is located more than 2
SM from the landing site, the turn from the final approach
to the visual segment is greater than 30 degrees, or the VFR
segment from the MAP to the landing site has obstructions
that require pilot actions to avoid them. Figure 7-13 is an
example of a public PinS approach that allows the pilot to
fly to one of four heliports after reaching the MAP.
For Part 135 operations, pilots may not begin the instrument
approach unless the latest weather report indicates that the
weather conditions are at or above the authorized IFR or VFR
minimums as required by the class of airspace, operating rule
and/or OpSpecs, whichever is higher. Visual contact with the
landing site is not required; however, prior to the MAP, for
either Part 91 or 135 operators, the pilot must determine if
the flight visibility meets the basic VFR minimums required
by the class of airspace, operating rule and/or OpSpecs
(whichever is higher). The visibility is limited to no lower
than that published in the procedure until canceling IFR. If
VFR minimums do not exist, then the published MAP must
be executed. The pilot must contact air traffic control (ATC)
upon reaching the MAP, or as soon as practical after that, and
advise whether executing the missed approach or canceling
IFR and proceeding VFR.
To proceed VFR in uncontrolled airspace, Part 135 operators
must observe minimum regulatory VFR conditions, but
under some conditions, such as provided for in 14 CFR
135.613 for HAA operators, specific weather minimums are
required when near the MAP and the heliport of intended
landing. These minimums apply regardless of whether the
approach is located on the plains of Oklahoma or in the
Colorado mountains. However, for heliports located farther
than 3 NM from the heliport, Part135 HAA operators are
held to an even higher standard and the minimums and
lighting conditions contained in Figure 7-15 apply to the
entire route. Mountainous terrain at night with low light
conditions requires a ceiling of 1,000 feet and either 3 SM or
5 SM visibility depending on whether it has been determined
as part of the operator’s local flying area.
In Class B, C, D, and E surface area airspace, a SVFR clearance
may be obtained if SVFR minimums exist. On your flight plan,
give ATC a heads up about your intentions by entering the
following in the remarks section: “Request SVFR clearance
after the MAP.”
Approach to a Specific VFR Heliport
The note associated with these procedures is: “PROCEED
VISUALLY FROM (NAMED MAP) OR CONDUCT THE
SPECIFIED MISSED APPROACH.” Due to their unique
characteristics, these approaches require training. They
are developed for hospitals, oil rigs, private heliports, etc.
As Specials, they require Flight Standards approval by a
Letter of Authorization (LOA) for Part 91 operators or by
OpSpecs for Part 135 operators. For public procedures, the
heliport associated with these procedures must be located
within 2 SM of the MAP, the visual segment between the
MAP and the heliport evaluated for obstacle hazards,
and the heliport must meet the appropriate VFR heliport
recommendations of AC 150/5390-2, Heliport Design.
The PinS optimum location is 0.65 NM from the heliport.
This provides an adequate distance to decelerate and land
from an approach speed of 70 KIAS. Certain airframes may
be certified to fly at reduced VMINI or below VMINI speeds
as a result of flight control design or adherence to AC
29-2, Certification of Transport Category Rotorcraft. In
these cases, an approach procedure stating the minimum

Figure 7-13. COPTER RNAV (GPS) 250° at New York/La Guardia Airport.

Point-in-Space Approach Examples
Under Part 91, the operator flies the published IFR PinS approach procedure that has a charted MDA of 340 mean sea level (MSL)
and visibility of ¾ SM. When approaching the MAP at an altitude of 340 feet MSL, the pilot transitions from Instrument Meteorological
Conditions (IMC) to Visual Meteorological Conditions (VMC) and determines that the flight visibility is ½ SM. The pilot must determine
prior to the MAP whether the applicable basic VFR weather minimums can be maintained from the MAP to the heliport or execute a
missed approach. If the pilot determines that the applicable basic VFR weather minimums can be maintained to the heliport, the pilot
may proceed VFR. If the visual segment is in Class B, C, D, or the surface area of Class E airspace, it may require the pilot to obtain
a Special VFR clearance.
For an operator to proceed VFR under Part 135, a minimum visibility of ½ SM during the day and 1 SM at night with a minimum
ceiling of 300 feet. If prior to commencing the approach, the pilot determines the reported visibility is ¾ SM during the day, the pilot
descends IMC to an altitude no lower than the MDA and transitions to VMC. If the pilot determines prior to the MAP that the flight
visibility is less than ½ SM in the visual segment, a missed approach must be executed at the MAP.
Figure 7-15. Point-in-space (PinS) approach examples for Part 91 and Part 135 operations.
certified airspeed or flight below VMINI should be annotated
on the approach procedure. The distance also permits
optimal blending of obstacle clearance criteria with non-
instrument heliport approach areas.
The visibility minimum is based on the distance from the
MAP to the heliport, among other factors (e.g., height
above the heliport elevation when at the MAP MDA). The
pilot is required to acquire and maintain visual contact
with the heliport final approach and takeoff (FATO) area
at or prior to the MAP. Obstacle or terrain avoidance from
the MAP to the heliport is the responsibility of the pilot.
Pilots need to level off when reaching the MDA, which
may occur before arriving at the MAP, until reaching the
visual approach angle on the approach path to clear the
obstacles. If the required weather minimums do not exist,
then the published MAP must be executed at the MAP
because IFR obstruction clearance areas are not applied to
the visual segment of the approach and a missed approach
segment protection is not provided between the MAP
and the heliport. As soon as practicable after reaching
the MAP, the pilot advises ATC whether cancelling IFR and
proceeding visually or executing the missed approach.
Inadvertent IMC
Whether it is a corporate or HAA operation, helicopter pilots
sometimes operate in challenging weather conditions. An
encounter with weather that does not permit continued
flight under VFR might occur when conditions do not allow
for the visual determination of a usable horizon (e.g., fog,
snow showers, or night operations over unlit surfaces such
as water). Flight in conditions of limited visual contrast
should be avoided since this can result in a loss of horizontal
or surface reference, and obstacles such as wires become
perceptually invisible. To prevent spatial disorientation, loss
of control (LOC) or CFIT, pilots should slow the helicopter to a
speed that provides a controlled deceleration in the distance
equal to the forward visibility. The pilot should look for terrain
that provides sufficient contrast to either continue the flight
or to make a precautionary landing. If spatial disorientation
occurs and a climb into IMC is not feasible due to fuel state,
icing conditions, equipment, etc., make every effort to land
the helicopter with a slight forward descent to prevent any
sideward or rearward motion.
All helicopter pilots should receive training on avoidance
and recovery from inadvertent IMC with emphasis on
avoidance. An unplanned transition from VMC to IMC flight
is an emergency that involves a different set of pilot actions.
It requires the use of different navigation and operational
procedures, interaction with ATC, and crewmember resource
management (CRM). Consideration should be given to the
local flying area’s terrain, airspace, air traffic facilities, weather
(including seasonal affects such as icing and thunderstorms),
and available airfield/heliport approaches.
Training should emphasize the identification of
circumstances conducive to inadvertent IMC and a
strategy to abandon continued VFR flight in deteriorating
conditions. This strategy should include a minimum
altitude/airspeed combination that provides for an off­

airport/heliport landing, diverting to better conditions,
or initiating an emergency transition to IFR. Pilots should
be able to readily identify the minimum initial altitude
and course in order to avoid CFIT. Current IFR en route
and approach charts for the route of flight are essential.
A GPS navigation receiver with a moving map provides
exceptional situational awareness for terrain and obstacle
avoidance.
Training for an emergency transition to IFR should
include full and partial panel instrument flight, unusual
attitude recovery, ATC communications, and instrument
approaches. If an ILS is available and the helicopter is
equipped, an ILS approach should be made. Otherwise, if
the helicopter is equipped with an IFR approach-capable
GPS receiver with a current database, a GPS approach
should be made. If neither, an ILS or GPS procedure is
available use another instrument approach.
Upon entering inadvertent IMC, priority must be given
to control of the helicopter. Keep it simple and take one
action at a time.
Control. First use the wings on the attitude indicator
to level the helicopter. Maintain heading and
increase to climb power. Establish climb airspeed
at the best angle of climb but no slower than VMINI.
Climb. Climb straight ahead until your crosscheck is
established. Then make a turn only to avoid terrain
or objects. If an altitude has not been previously
established with ATC to climb to for inadvertent IMC,
then you should climb to an altitude that is at least
1,000 feet above the highest known object and that
allows for contacting ATC.
Communicate. Attempt to contact ATC as soon as
the helicopter is stabilized in the climb and headed
away from danger. If the appropriate frequency is
not known, you should attempt to contact ATC on
either very high frequency (VHF) 121.5 or ultra high
frequency (UHF) 243.0. Initial information provided
to ATC should be your approximate location, that
inadvertent IMC has been encountered and an
emergency climb has been made, your altitude,
amount of flight time remaining (fuel state), and
number of persons on board. You should then
request a vector to either VFR weather conditions
or to the nearest suitable airport/heliport that
conditions will support a successful approach. If
unable to contact ATC and a transponder code
has not been previously established with ATC for
inadvertent IMC, change the transponder code to
7700.
A radio altimeter is a necessity for alerting the pilot
when inadvertently going below the minimum altitude.
Barometric altimeters are subject to inaccuracies that
become important in helicopter IFR operations, especially
in cold temperatures.
IFR Heliports
AC 150/5390-2, Heliport Design, provides recommendations
for heliport design to support non-precision, approach with
vertical guidance (APV), and precision approaches to a
heliport. When a heliport does not meet the criteria of AC
150/5390-2, FAA Order 8260.42, United States Standard
for Helicopter Area Navigation (RNAV), requires that an
instrument approach be published as a Special procedure
with annotations that special aircrew qualifications are
required to fly the procedure. Currently, there are no
operational civil IFR heliports in the U.S., although the U.S.
military has some non-precision and precision approach
procedures to IFR heliports.

Appendix A
Emergency Procedures
Introduction
Changing weather conditions, air traffic control (ATC), aircraft, and pilots are variables that make instrument flying an
unpredictable and challenging operation. Safety of the flight depends on the pilot’s ability to manage these variables
while maintaining positive aircraft control and adequate situational awareness (SA). This appendix discusses recognition
and suggested remedies for emergency events related to un-forecasted, adverse weather, aircraft system malfunctions,
communication/navigation system malfunctions, loss of SA, and inadvertent instrument meteorological conditions
(IIMCs).
Emergencies
An emergency can be either a distress or urgency condition as defined in the pilot/controller glossary. Distress is defined
as a condition of being threatened by serious and/or imminent danger and requiring immediate assistance. Urgency is
defined as a condition of being concerned about safety and requiring timely but not immediate assistance; a potential
distress condition.
Pilots do not hesitate to declare an emergency when faced with distress conditions, such as fire, mechanical failure,
or structural damage. However, some are reluctant to report an urgency condition when encountering situations that
may not be immediately perilous but are potentially catastrophic. An aircraft is in an urgency condition the moment
that the pilot becomes doubtful about position, fuel endurance, weather, or any other condition that could adversely
affect flight safety. The time for a pilot to request assistance is when an urgent situation may, or has just occurred, not
after it has developed into a distress situation.
The pilot in command (PIC) is responsible for crew, passengers, and operation of the aircraft at all times. Title 14 of the
Code of Federal Regulations (14 CFR) part 91, § 91.3 allows deviations from regulations during emergencies that allow
the PIC to make the best decision to ensure safety of all personnel during these contingencies. Also, by declaring an
emergency during flight, that aircraft becomes a priority to land safely. Pilots who become apprehensive for their safety
for any reason should request assistance immediately. Assistance is available in the form of radio, radar, direction finding
(DF) stations, and other aircraft.
Inadvertent Thunderstorm Encounter
A pilot should always avoid intentionally flying through a thunderstorm of any intensity; however, certain conditions may
be present that could lead to an inadvertent thunderstorm encounter. For example, flying in areas where thunderstorms
are embedded in large cloud masses may make thunderstorm avoidance difficult, even when the aircraft is equipped
with thunderstorm detection equipment. Pilots must be prepared to deal with inadvertent thunderstorm penetration.
At the very least, a thunderstorm encounter subjects the aircraft to turbulence that could be severe. The pilot, as well
as the crew and any passengers, should tighten seat belts and shoulder harnesses and secure any loose items in the
cabin or flight deck.
As with any emergency, the first order of business is to fly the aircraft. The pilot workload is high; therefore, increased
concentration is necessary to maintain an instrument scan. Once in a thunderstorm, it is better to maintain a course
straight through the thunderstorm rather than turning around. A straight course most likely gets the pilot out of the
hazard in the least amount of time, and turning maneuvers only increase structural stress on the aircraft.
Reduce power to a setting that maintains a recommended turbulence penetration speed as described in the appropriate
aircraft operator’s manual, and try to minimize additional power adjustments. Concentrate on keeping the aircraft in

a level attitude while allowing airspeed and altitude to fluctuate. Similarly, if using autopilot, disengage altitude and
speed hold modes because they only increase the aircraft’s maneuvering, which increases structural stress.
During a thunderstorm encounter, the potential for icing also exists. As soon as possible, if the aircraft is so equipped,
turn on anti-icing/deicing equipment. Icing can be rapid at any altitude, and may lead to power failure and/or loss of
airspeed indication. Lightning is also present in a thunderstorm and can temporarily blind the pilot. To reduce risk,
turn up flight deck lights to the highest intensity, concentrate on flight instruments, and resist the urge to look outside.
Inadvertent Icing Encounter
Because icing is unpredictable, pilots may find themselves in icing conditions although they have done everything to
avoid the condition. To stay alert to this possibility while operating in visible moisture, pilots should monitor the outside
air temperature (OAT).
Anti-icing/de-icing equipment is critical to safety of the flight. If anti-icing/de-icing equipment is not used before
sufficient ice has accumulated, it may not be able to remove all ice accumulation. Use of anti-icing/de-icing reduces
power availability; therefore, pilots should be familiar with the aircraft operator’s manual for use of anti-icing/de-icing
equipment.
Before entering visible moisture with temperatures at five degrees above freezing or cooler, activate appropriate
anti-icing/de-icing equipment in anticipation of ice accumulation; early ice detection is critical. Detecting ice may be
particularly difficult during night flight. The pilot may need to use a flashlight to check for ice accumulation on the
wings, fuselage, landing gear, and horizontal stabilizer. At the first indication of ice accumulation, the pilot must act
to circumvent icing conditions. Options for action once ice has begun to accumulate on the aircraft are the following:
Move to an altitude with significantly colder temperatures.
Move to an altitude with temperatures above freezing.
Fly to an area clear of visible moisture.
Change the heading, and fly to an area of known non-icing conditions.
If these options are not available, consider an immediate landing at the nearest suitable airport. Anti-icing/de-icing
equipment does not allow aircraft to operate in icing conditions indefinitely; it only provides more time to evade icing
conditions. If icing is encountered, an aircraft controllability check should be considered in the landing configuration.
Give careful consideration to configuration changes that might produce unanticipated aircraft flight dynamics.
Precipitation Static
Precipitation static occurs when accumulated static electricity discharges from extremities of the aircraft. This discharge
has the potential to create problems with the aircraft’s instruments. These problems range from serious, such as
complete loss of VHF communications and erroneous magnetic compass readings, to the annoyance of high-pitched
audio squealing.
Precipitation static is caused when an aircraft encounters airborne particles during flight (rain or snow) and develops a
negative charge. It can also result from atmospheric electric fields in thunderstorm clouds. When a significant negative
voltage level is reached, the aircraft discharges it, creating electrical disturbances. To reduce problems associated with
precipitation static, the pilot ensures that the aircraft’s static wicks are maintained and accounted for. All broken or
missing static wicks should be replaced before an instrument flight.
Aircraft System Malfunction
Preventing aircraft system malfunctions that might lead to an in-flight emergency begins with a thorough preflight
inspection. In addition to items normally checked before visual flight rules (VFR) flight, pilots intending to fly instrument
flight rules (IFR) should pay particular attention to antennas, static wicks, anti-icing/de-icing equipment, pitot tube, and
static ports. During taxi, verify operation and accuracy of all flight instruments. The pilots must ensure that all systems
are operational before departing into IFR conditions.

Generator Failure
Depending on aircraft being flown, a generator failure is indicated in different ways. Some aircraft use an ammeter
that indicates the state of charge or discharge of the battery. A positive indication on the ammeter indicates a charge
condition; a negative indication reveals a discharge condition. Other aircraft use a load meter to indicate the load being
carried by the generator. If the generator fails, a zero load indication is shown on the load meter. Review the appropriate
aircraft operator’s manual for information on the type of systems installed in the aircraft.
Once a generator failure is detected, the pilot must reduce electrical load on the battery and land as soon as practical.
Depending on electrical load and condition of the battery, sufficient power may be available for an hour or more of
flight or for only a matter of minutes. The pilot must be familiar with systems requiring electricity to run and which
continue to operate without power. In aircraft with multiple generators, care should be taken to reduce electrical load
to avoid overloading the operating generator(s). The pilot can attempt to troubleshoot generator failure by following
established procedures published in the appropriate aircraft operator’s manual. If the generator cannot be reset, inform
ATC of an impending electrical failure.
Instrument Failure
System or instrument failure is usually identified by a warning indicator or an inconsistency between indications on
the attitude indicator, supporting performance instruments, and instruments at the other pilot station, if so equipped.
Aircraft control must be maintained while the pilot identifies the failed components and expedite cross-check including
all flight instruments. The problem may be individual instrument failure or a system failure affecting several instruments.
One method of identification involves an immediate comparison of the attitude indicator with rate-of-turn indicator
and vertical speed indicator (VSI). Along with providing pitch-and-bank information, this technique compares the static
system with the pressure system and electrical system. Identify the failed components and use remaining functional
instruments to maintain aircraft control. Attempt to restore inoperative components by checking the appropriate power
source, changing to a backup or alternate system, and resetting the instrument if possible. Covering failed instruments
may enhance the ability to maintain aircraft control and navigate the aircraft. ATC should be notified of the problem
and, if necessary, declare an emergency before the situation deteriorates beyond the ability to recover.
Pitot/Static System Failure
A pitot or static system failure can also cause erratic and unreliable instrument indications. When a static system
problem occurs, it affects the airspeed indicator, altimeter, and VSI. In the absence of an alternate static source in an
unpressurized aircraft, the pilot could break the glass on the VSI because it is not required for instrument flight. Breaking
the glass provides both the altimeter and airspeed indicator a source of static pressure, but pilots should be cautious
because breaking the glass can cause additional instrument errors. Before considering, pilots should be familiar with
their aircraft’s specific procedures for static problems.
Loss of Situational Awareness (SA)
SA is an overall assessment of environmental elements and how they affect flight. SA permits the pilot to make decisions
ahead of time and allows evaluation of several different options. Conversely, a pilot who is missing important information
about the flight is apt to make reactive decisions. Poor SA means that the pilot lacks vision regarding future events
that can force him or her to make decisions quickly often with limited options. During an IFR flight, pilots operate at
varying levels of SA. For example, a pilot may be en route to a destination with a high level of SA when ATC issues an
unexpected standard terminal arrival route (STAR). Because the STAR is unexpected and the pilot is unfamiliar with the
procedure, SA is reduced. However, after becoming familiar with the STAR and resuming normal navigation, the pilot
returns to a higher level of SA.
Factors reducing SA include distractions, unusual or unexpected events, complacency, high workload, unfamiliar
situations, and inoperative equipment. In some situations, a loss of SA may be beyond a pilot’s control. With an electrical
system failure and associated loss of an attitude indication, a pilot may find the aircraft in an unusual attitude. In this

situation, established procedures are used to regain SA and aircraft control. Pilots must be alert to loss of SA especially
when hampered by a reactive mindset. To regain SA, reassess the situation and work toward understanding what the
problem is. The pilot may need to seek additional information from other sources, such as navigation instruments, other
crewmembers, or ATC.
Inadvertent Instrument Meteorological Condition (IIMC)
Some pilots have the misconception that inadvertent instrument meteorological condition (IIMC) does not apply to an IFR
flight. The following examples could cause a pilot to inadvertently encounter IMC.
1. The aircraft has entered visual meteorological conditions (VMC) during an instrument approach procedure
(IAP) and while circling to land encounters IMC.
2. During a non-precision IAP, the aircraft, in VMC, levels at the MDA just below the overcast. Suddenly, the
aircraft re-enters the overcast because either the pilot was unable to correctly hold his or her altitude and
climbed back into the overcast, or the overcast sloped downward ahead of the aircraft and, while maintaining
the correct MDA, the aircraft re-entered the clouds.
3. After inadvertently re-entering the clouds, the pilot maintains aircraft control, and then maneuvers to the
published holding fix, while contacting ATC. If navigational guidance or pilot SA were lost, the pilot would
then climb to the published MSA (see AIM paragraph 5-4-7c).
In order to survive an encounter with IIMC, a pilot must recognize and accept the seriousness of the situation. The pilot
will need to immediately commit to the instruments and perform the proper recovery procedures.
Maintaining Aircraft Control
Once the crewmembers recognize the situation, they commit to controlling the aircraft by using and trusting flight
instruments. Attempting to search outside the flight deck for visual confirmation can result in spatial disorientation
and complete loss of control. The crew must rely on instruments and depend on crew coordination to facilitate that
transition. The pilot or flight crew must abandon their efforts to establish visual references and fly the aircraft by their
flight instruments.
The most important concern, along with maintaining aircraft control, is to initiate a climb immediately. An immediate
climb provides a greater separation from natural and manmade obstacles, as well as improve radar reception of the
aircraft by ATC. An immediate climb should be appropriate for the current conditions, environment, and known or
perceived obstacles. Listed below are procedures that can assist in maintaining aircraft control after encountering IIMC
with the most critical action being to immediately announce IIMC and begin a substantial climb while procedures are
being performed. These procedures are performed nearly simultaneously:
Attitude—level wings on the attitude indicator.
Heading—maintain heading; turn only to avoid known obstacles.
Power—adjust power as necessary for desired climb rate.
Airspeed—adjust airspeed as necessary. Complete the IIMC recovery according to local and published
regulations and policies.
In situations where the pilot encounters IIMC while conducting an instrument maneuver, the best remedy is immediate
execution of the published missed approach.
The pilot must trust the flight instruments concerning the aircraft’s attitude regardless of intuition or visual interpretation.
The vestibular sense (motion sensing by the inner ear) can confuse the pilot. Because of inertia, sensory areas of the
inner ear cannot detect slight changes in aircraft attitude nor can they accurately sense attitude changes that occur at
a uniform rate over time. Conversely, false sensations often push the pilot to believe that the attitude of the aircraft has
changed when in fact it has not, resulting in spatial disorientation.

ATC Requirements During an In-Flight Emergency
ATC personnel can help pilots during in-flight emergency situations. Pilots should understand the services provided
by ATC and the resources and options available. These services enable pilots to focus on aircraft control and help them
make better decisions in a time of stress.
Provide Information
During emergency situations, pilots should provide as much information as possible to ATC. ATC uses the information to
determine what kind of assistance it can provide with available assets and capabilities. Information requirements vary
depending on the existing situation. ATC requires at a minimum, the following information for in-flight emergencies:
Aircraft identification and type
Nature of the emergency
Pilot’s desires
If time and the situation permits, the pilot should provide ATC with more information. Listed below is additional
information that would help ATC in further assisting the pilot during an emergency situation.
Aircraft altitude
Point of departure and destination
Airspeed
Fuel remaining in time
Heading since last known position
Visible landmarks
Navigational aids (NAVAID) signals received
Time and place of last known position
Aircraft color
Pilot reported weather
Emergency equipment on board
Number of people on board
Pilot capability for IFR flight
Navigation equipment capability
When the pilot requests, or when deemed necessary, ATC can enlist services of available radar facilities and DF facilities
operated by the FAA. ATC can also coordinate with other agencies, such as the U.S. Coast Guard (USCG) and other local
authorities and request their emergency services.
Radar Assistance
Radar is an invaluable asset that can be used by pilots during emergencies. With radar, ATC can provide navigation
assistance to aircraft and provide last-known location during catastrophic emergencies. If a VFR aircraft encounters or
is about to encounter IMC weather conditions, the pilot can request radar vectors to VFR airports or VFR conditions. If
the pilot determines that he or she is qualified and the aircraft is capable of conducting IFR flight, the pilot should file
an IFR flight plan and request a clearance from ATC to the destination airport as appropriate. If the aircraft has already
encountered IFR conditions, ATC can inform the pilot of appropriate terrain/obstacle clearance minimum altitude. If the
aircraft is below appropriate terrain/obstacle clearance minimum altitude and sufficiently accurate position information
has been received or radar identification is established, ATC can furnish a heading or radial on which to climb to reach
appropriate terrain/ obstacle clearance minimum altitude.

Emergency Airports
ATC personnel consider how much remaining fuel in relation to the distance to the airport and weather conditions
when recommending an emergency airport to aircraft requiring assistance. Depending on the nature of the emergency,
certain weather phenomena may deserve weighted consideration. A pilot may elect to fly further to land at an airport
with VFR conditions instead of closer airfield with IFR conditions. Other considerations are airport conditions, NAVAID
status, aircraft type, pilot’s qualifications, and vectoring or homing capability to the emergency airport. In addition,
ATC and pilots should determine which guidance can be used to fly to the emergency airport. The following options
may be available:
Radar
DF
Following another aircraft
NAVAIDs
Pilotage by landmarks
Compass headings
Emergency Obstruction Video Map (EOVM)
The emergency obstruction video map (EOVM) is intended to facilitate advisory service in an emergency situation when
appropriate terrain/obstacle clearance minimum altitude cannot be maintained. The EOVM, and the service provided,
are used only under the following conditions:
1. The pilot has declared an emergency.
2. The controller has determined an emergency condition exists or is imminent because of the pilots inability to
maintain an appropriate terrain/obstacle clearance minimum altitude.
Note: Appropriate terrain/obstacle clearance minimum altitudes may be defined as minimum IFR altitude (MIA), minimum
en route altitude (MEA), minimum obstacle clearance altitude (MOCA), or minimum vectoring altitude (MVA).
When providing emergency vectoring service, the controller advises the pilot that any headings issued are emergency
advisories intended only to direct the aircraft toward and over an area of lower terrain/obstacle elevation. Altitudes and
obstructions depicted on the EOVM are actual altitudes and locations of the obstacle/terrain and contain no lateral or
vertical buffers for obstruction clearance.
Responsibility
ATC, in communication with an aircraft in distress, should handle the emergency and coordinate and direct the activities
of assisting facilities. ATC will not transfer this responsibility to another facility unless that facility can better handle the
situation. When an ATC facility receives information about an aircraft in distress, they forward detailed data to the center
in the area of the emergency. Centers serve as central points for collecting information, coordinating with search and
rescue (SAR) and distributing information to appropriate agencies.
Although 121.5 megahertz and 243.0 megahertz are emergency frequencies, the pilot should keep the aircraft on the
initial contact frequency. The pilot should change frequencies only when a valid reason exists. When necessary, and
if weather and circumstances permit, ATC should recommend that aircraft maintain or increase altitude to improve
communications, radar, or DF reception.
Escort
An escort aircraft, if available, should consider and evaluate an appropriate formation. Special consideration must be
given if maneuvers take the aircraft through clouds. Aircraft should not execute an in-flight join up during emergency
conditions unless both crews involved are familiar with and capable of formation flight and can communicate and have
visual contact with each other.

Appendix B
Acronyms
A
AAC—Aircraft Administration Communications
AAUP—Attention All Users Page
AC—Advisory Circular
ACARS—Aircraft Communications Addressing and Reporting System
ADCs—Air Data Computer
ADDS—Aviation Digital Data Services
ADF—Automatic Direction Finder
ADS—Automatic Dependent Surveillance
ADS-B—Automatic Dependent Surveillance-Broadcast
AEG—Aircraft Evaluation Group
A/FD—Airport/Facility Directory section of the Chart Supplement (CS)
AFM—Aircraft Flight Manual
AFMS—Aircraft Flight Manual Supplements
AFS—Aircraft Flight Safety
AFS—Flight Standards Service
AFSS—Automated Flight Service Station
AGL—Above Ground Level
AIM—Aeronautical Information Manual
AIP—Aeronautical Information Publication
AIR—Aircraft Certification Service
AIRMET—Airman’s Meteorological Information
ALT ACQ—Altitude Acquire
ALT Hold—Altitude Hold
ANP—Actual Navigation Performance
AOC—Aircraft Operational Communications
APT WP—Airport Waypoint
APV—Approach with Vertical Guidance
ARINC—Aeronautical Radio Incorporated
A-RNAV—Advanced Area Navigation
ARTCC—Air Route Traffic Control Center
ARTS—Automated Radar Terminal System
ASDA—Accelerate-Stop Distance Available
ASDE-X—Airport Surface Detection Equipment-Model X
A-SMGCS—Advanced Surface Movement Guidance and Control System
ASOS—Automated Surface Observing System
ASR—Airport Surveillance Radar
ASRS—Aviation Safety Reporting System
ATA—Air Transport Association
ATC—Air Traffic Control
ATCAA—Air Traffic Control Assigned Airspace
ATCRBS—Air Traffic Control Radar Beacon System
ATCS—Air Traffic Control Specialist
ATD—Along-Track Distance

C
ATIS—Automatic Terminal Information Service
ATS—Air Traffic Service
AWC—Aviation Weather Center
AWOS—Automated Weather Observing System
AWSS—Automated Weather Sensor System
B
Baro-VNAV—Barometric Vertical Navigation
B-RNAV—European Basic RNAV
CAT—Category
CDI—Course Deviation Indicator
CDL—Configuration Deviation List
CENRAP—Center Radar ARTS Processing
CFA—Controlled Firing Areas
CFIT—Controlled Flight Into Terrain
CFR—Code of Federal Regulations
CNF—Computer Navigation Fix
COP—Changeover Point
COTS—Commercial Off-The-Shelf
CRC—Cyclic Redundancy Check
CS—Chart Supplement
CTAF—Common Traffic Advisory Frequency
CVFP—Charted Visual Flight Procedure
CWAS—Center Weather Advisories
D
DA—Density Altitude; Decision Altitude
D-ATIS—Digital Automatic Terminal Information Service
D-CS—Digital Chart Supplement
DDA—Derived Decision Altitude
DEM—Digital Elevation Model
DER—Departure End of the Runway
DF—Direction Finding
DH—Decision Height
DME—Distance Measuring Equipment
DOD—Department of Defense
DOT—Department of Transportation
DPs—Departure Procedures
DRVSM—Domestic Reduced Vertical Separation Minimums
DUATS—Direct User Access Terminal System
DVA—Diverse Vector Area
E
E/D—End of Decent
EDCT—Expect Departure Clearance Time
EFAS—En-Route Flight Advisory Service
EFB—Electronic Flight Bag
EFC—Expect Further Clearance
EFV—Enhanced Flight Visibility

EFVS—Enhanced Flight Vision System
EGPWS—Enhanced Ground Proximity Warning System
EOPs—Engine Out Procedures
EOVM—Emergency Obstruction Video Map
ER-OPS—Extended Range Operations
ETA—Estimated Time of Arrival
EV—Enhanced Vision
EVO—Equivalent Visual Operations
EWINS—Enhanced Weather Information System
F
FAA—Federal Aviation Administration
FAF—Final Approach Fix
FAP—Final Approach Point
FB—Fly-By
FCC—Federal Communications Commission
FD—Flight Director
FDP—Flight Data Processing
FE—Flight Engineer
FIR—Flight Information Region
FIS—Flight Information System
FIS-B—Flight Information Services–Broadcast
FISDL—Flight Information Services Data Link
FL—Flight Level
FL CHG—Flight Level Change
FLIR—Forward Looking Infra-Red
FMC—Flight Management Computer
FMS—Flight Management System
FO—Fly-Over
FOM—Flight Operations Manual
FPA—Flight Path Angle
FPV—Flight Path Vector
FSB—Flight Standardization Board
FSDO—Flight Standards District Office
FSL—NOAA Forecast Systems Laboratory
FSS—Flight Service Station
G
GBAS—Ground-Based Augmentation System
GCA—Ground Controlled Approach
GCO—Ground Communication Outlet
GDP—Ground Delay Programs
GDPE—Ground Delay Program Enhancements
GLS—Ground Based Augmentation System Landing System
GNSS—Global Navigation Satellite System
GPS—Global Positioning System
GPWS—Ground Proximity Warning System
G/S—Glide Slope
GS—Ground Speed
GWS—Graphical Weather Service

H
HAA—Height Above Airport
HAR—High Altitude Redesign
HAT—Height Above Touchdown
HAZMAT—Hazardous Materials
HDD—Head-Down Display
HF—High Frequency
HGS—Head-up Guidance System
HIWAS—Hazardous In-flight Weather Advisory Service
HSI—Horizontal Situation Indicator
HUD—Head-up Display
I
IAF—Initial Approach Fix
IAP—Instrument Approach Procedure
IAS—Indicated Air Speed
ICAO—International Civil Aviation Organization
IF—Intermediate Fix
IFR—Instrument Flight Rules
IIMC—Inadvertent Instrument Meteorological Condition
ILS—Instrument Landing System
IMC—Instrument Meteorological Conditions
INS—Inertial Navigation System
IOC—Initial Operational Capability
IRU—Inertial Reference Unit
K
KIAS—knots indicated airspeed
KLAX—Los Angeles International Airport
KLMU—Monroe Regional Airport
L
LAAS—Local Area Augmentation System
LAHSO—Land And Hold Short Operations
LDA—Localizer-type Directional Aid; Landing Distance Available
LF—Low Frequency
LNAV—Lateral Navigation
LOC—Localizer
LOM—Locator Outer Marker
LPV—Localizer Performance with Vertical Guidance
LTP—Landing Threshold Point
LVL CHG—Level Change
M
MAA—Maximum Authorized Altitude
MAHWP—Missed Approach Holding Waypoint
MAMS—Military Airspace Management System
MAP—Missed Approach Point
MCA—Minimum Crossing Altitude

MDA—Minimum Descent Altitude
MDH—Minimum Descent Height
MEA—Minimum En-route Altitude
MEL—Minimum Equipment List
METAR—Aviation Routine Weather Report
MF—Medium Frequency
MIA—Minimum IFR Altitude
MLS—Microwave Landing System
MMWR—Millimeter Wave Radar
MNPS—Minimum Navigation Performance Specifications
MOA—Military Operations Area
MOCA—Minimum Obstruction Clearance Altitude
MOPS—Minimum Operational Performance Standards
MORA—Minimum Off-Route Altitude
MRA—Minimum Reception Altitude
MSA—Minimum Safe Altitude
MSAW—Minimum Safe Altitude Warning
MSL—Mean Sea Level
MTA—Minimum Turning Altitude
MTR—Military Training Route
MVA—Minimum Vectoring Altitude
N
NA—Not Authorized
NACO—National Aeronautical Charting Office
NAS—National Airspace System
NASA—National Aeronautics and Space Administration
NAT—North Atlantic
NAVAID—Navigational Aid
NCAR—National Center for Atmospheric Research
NDB—Non-Directional Beacon
NextGen—Next Generation Air Transportation System
NFDC—National Flight Data Center
NGA—National Geospatial- Intelligence Agency
NM—Nautical Mile
NMAC—Near Mid-Air Collision
NNEW—Next Generation Network-Enabled
NOAA—National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
NO A/G—No Air-to-Ground Communication
NOPAC—North Pacific
NOTAM—Notice to Airmen
NOZ—Normal Operating Zone
NPA—Non-Precision Approach
NRR—Non-Restrictive Routing
NRS—National Reference System
NTAP—Notice to Airmen Publication
NTSB—National Transportation Safety Board
NTZ—No Transgression Zone
NVS—NAS voice switch
NWS—National Weather Service

O
OAT—Outside Air Temperature
OBS—Omni Bearing Selector
OCS—Obstacle Clearance Surface
ODP—Obstacle Departure Procedure
OpSpecs—Operations Specifications
OROCA—Off-Route Obstruction Clearance Altitude
OSV—Operational Service Volume
P
PA—Precision Approach
PAR—Precision Approach Radar
PCG—Positive Course Guidance
PDC—Pre-Departure Clearance
PDR—Preferential Departure Route
PF—Pilot Flying
PFD—Primary Flight Display
PI—Principal Inspector
PIC—Pilot In Command
PIREP—Pilot Weather Report
PKI—Public/Private Key Technology
PM—Pilot Monitoring
POH—Pilot’s Operating Handbook
POI—Principle Operations Inspector
PRM—Precision Runway Monitor
P-RNAV—European Precision RNAV
PT—Procedure Turn
PTP—Point-To-Point
Q
QFE—Transition Height
QNE—Transition Level
QNH—Transition Altitude
R
RA—Resolution Advisory; Radio Altitude
RAIM—Receiver Autonomous Integrity Monitoring
RAL—Research Applications Laboratory
RCO—Remote Communications Outlet
RJ—Regional Jet
RNAV—Area Navigation
RNP—Required Navigation Performance
RNP AR—Required Navigation Performance Authorization Required
ROC—Required Obstacle Clearance
RSP—Runway Safety Program
RVR—Runway Visual Range
RVSM—Reduced Vertical Separation Minimums
RVV—Runway Visibility Value
RWY—Runway
RWY WP—Runway Waypoint

S
SA—Situational Awareness
SAMS—Special Use Airspace Management System
SAR—Search and Rescue
SAS—Stability Augmentation System
SDF—Simplified Directional Facility
SDR—Service Difficulty Reports
SER—Start End of Runway
SIAP—Standard Instrument Approach Procedure
SID—Standard Instrument Departure
SIGMET—Significant Meteorological Information
SM—Statute Mile
SMA—Surface Movement Advisor
SMGCS—Surface Movement Guidance and Control System
SOIA—Simultaneous Offset Instrument Approaches
SOP—Standard Operating Procedure
SPECI—Non-routine (Special) Aviation Weather Report
SSV—Standard Service Volume
STAR—Standard Terminal Arrival
STARS—Standard Terminal Automation Replacement System
STC—Supplemental Type Certificate
SUA—Special Use Airspace
SUA/ISE—Special Use Airspace/In-flight Service Enhancement
SVFR—Special Visual Flight Rules
SVGS – Synthetic Vision Guidance System
SVS—Synthetic Vision System
SWAP—Severe Weather Avoidance Plan
SWIM—System Wide Information Management
T
TA—Traffic Advisory
TAA—Terminal Arrival Area
TACAN—Tactical Air Navigation
TAF—Terminal Aerodrome Forecast
TAS—True Air Speed
TAWS—Terrain Awareness and Warning Systems
TB—Track Bar
TCAS—Traffic Alert and Collision Avoidance System
TCH—Threshold Crossing Height
TDLS—Terminal Data Link System
TDZ—Touchdown Zone
TDZE—Touchdown Zone Elevation
TEC—Tower En-route Control
TERPS—Terminal Instrument Procedures
TFR—Temporary Flight Restriction
TIBS—Telephone Information Briefing Service
TIS-B—Traffic Information Service-Broadcast
TIBS—Telephone Information Briefing Service
TOC—Top Of Climb
TOD—Top Of Descent
TODA—Takeoff Distance Available
TOGA—Takeoff/Go Around

V
TORA—Takeoff Runway Available
TPP—Terminal Procedures Publication
TRACAB—Terminal Radar Approach Control in Tower Cab
TSO—Technical Standard Order
TSOA—Technical Standing Order Authorization
U
UHF—Ultra High Frequency
UNICOM—Universal Communications
U.S.—United States
USAF—United States Air Force
USDA—United States Department of Agriculture
VCOA—Visual Climb Over Airport / Airfield
VDA—Vertical Descent Angle
VDP—Visual Descent Point
VFR—Visual Flight Rules
VGSI—Visual Glide Slope Indicator
VHF—Very High Frequency
VLJ—Very Light Jet
VMC—Visual Meteorological Conditions
VMINI—Minimum Speed–IFR
VNAV—Vertical Navigation
VNEI—Never-Exceed Speed-IFR
VSI—Vertical Speed Indicator
VOR—Very High-Frequency Omnidirectional Range
VORTAC—Very High Frequency Omnidirectional Range/Tactical Air Navigation
VOT—VOR Test Facility Signal
VPA—Vertical Path Angle
VREF—Reference Landing Speed
V/S—Vertical Speed
VSO—Stalling Speed or the Minimum Steady Flight Speed in the Landing Configuration
W
WAAS—Wide Area Augmentation System
WAC—World Aeronautical Chart
WAM—Wide Area Multi-lateration
WP—Waypoint
Z
ZFW—Fort Worth Air Route Traffic Control Center

Glossary
Abeam Fix. A fix, NAVAID, point, or object positioned
approximately 90 degrees to the right or left of the aircraft
track along a route of flight. Abeam indicates a general
position rather than a precise point.
Accelerate-Stop Distance Available (ASDA). The runway
plus stopway length declared available and suitable for
the acceleration and deceleration of an airplane aborting a
takeoff.
Advanced Surface Movement Guidance and Control
System (A-SMGCS). A system providing routing, guidance
and surveillance for the control of aircraft and vehicles,
in order to maintain the declared surface movement rate
under all weather conditions within the aerodrome visibility
operational level (AVOL) while maintaining the required
level of safety.
Aircraft Approach Category. A grouping of aircraft based
on reference landing speed (VREF), if specified, or if VREF is
not specified, 1.3 VSO (the stalling speed or minimum steady
flight speed in the landing configuration) at the maximum
certificated landing weight.
Airport Diagram. A full-page depiction of the airport that
includes the same features of the airport sketch plus
additional details, such as taxiway identifiers, airport
latitude and longitude, and building identification. Airport
diagrams are located in the U.S. Terminal Procedures
booklet following the instrument approach charts for a
particular airport.
Airport/Facility Directory (A/FD). Section within the Chart
Supplement regional booklets published by Aeronautical
Information Services that provides information about all
airports in the region. The A/FD section includes runway
length and width, runway surface, load bearing capacity,
runway slope, airport services, and hazards, such as birds
and reduced visibility.
Airport Sketch. Depicts the runways and their length, width,
and slope, the touchdown zone elevation, the lighting
system installed on the end of the runway, and taxiways.
Airport sketches are located on the lower left or right
portion of the instrument approach chart.
Airport Surface Detection Equipment-Model X
(ASDE-X). Enables air traffic controllers to detect potential
runway conflicts by providing detailed coverage of movement
on runways and taxiways. By collecting data from a variety of
sources, ASDE-X is able to track vehicles and aircraft on the
airport movement area and obtain identification information
from aircraft transponders.
Air Route Traffic Control Center (ARTCC). A facility
established to provide air traffic control service to aircraft
operating on IFR flight plans within controlled airspace and
principally during the en route phase of flight
Air Traffic Service (ATS). Air traffic service is an ICAO
generic term meaning variously, flight information service,
alerting service, air traffic advisory service, air traffic control
service (area control service, approach control service, or
aerodrome control service).
Approach End of Runway (AER). The first portion of the
runway available for landing. If the runway threshold is
displaced, use the displaced threshold latitude/longitude
as the AER.
Approach Fix. From a database coding standpoint, an
approach fix is considered to be an identifiable point
in space from the intermediate fix (IF) inbound. A fix
located between the initial approach fix (IAF) and the IF is
considered to be associated with the approach transition
or feeder route.

Approach Gate. An imaginary point used by ATC to vector
aircraft to the final approach course. The approach gate
is established along the final approach course 1 NM from
the final approach fix (FAF) on the side away from the
airport and is located no closer than 5 NM from the landing
threshold.
Area Navigation (RNAV). A method of navigation that
permits aircraft operations on any desired course within
the coverage of station referenced navigation signals or
within the limits of self contained system capability.
Automated Surface Observing System (ASOS)/Automated
Weather Sensor System (AWSS). The ASOS/AWSS is the
primary surface weather observing system of the U.S.
Automated Surface Observing System (ASOS). A weather
observing system that provides minute-by minute weather
observations, such as temperature, dew point, wind, altimeter
setting, visibility, sky condition, and precipitation. Some
ASOS stations include a precipitation discriminator that can
differentiate between liquid and frozen precipitation.
Automated Weather Observing System (AWOS). A suite
of sensors that measure, collect, and disseminate weather
data. AWOS stations provide a minute-by-minute update
of weather parameters, such as wind speed and direction,
temperature and dew point, visibility, cloud heights and types,
precipitation, and barometric pressure. A variety of AWOS
system types are available (from AWOS 1 to AWOS 3), each
of which includes a different sensor array.
Automated Weather Sensor System (AWSS). The AWSS
is part of the Aviation Surface Weather Observation Network
suite of programs and provides pilots and other users
with weather information through the Automated Surface
Observing System. The AWSS sensor suite automatically
collects, measures, processes, and broadcasts surface
weather data.
Automated Weather System. Any of the automated
weather sensor platforms that collect weather data at
airports and disseminate the weather information via
radio and/or landline. The systems currently consist of the
Automated Surface Observing System (ASOS), Automated
Weather Sensor System (AWSS), and Automated Weather
Observation System (AWOS).
Automatic Dependent Surveillance-Broadcast (ADS-B).
A surveillance system that continuously broadcasts GPS
position information, aircraft identification, altitude,
velocity vector, and direction to all other aircraft and air
traffic control facilities within a specific area. Automatic
dependent surveillance-broadcast (ADS-B) information
is displayed in the flight deck via a flight deck display of
traffic information (CDTI) unit, providing the pilot with
greater situational awareness. ADS-B transmissions also
provides controllers with a more complete picture of traffic
and updates that information more frequently than other
surveillance equipment.
Automatic Terminal Information Service (ATIS). A
recorded broadcast available at most airports with an
operating control tower that includes crucial information
about runways and instrument approaches in use, specific
outages, and current weather conditions, including visibility.
Center Radar ARTS Presentation/Processing (CENRAP).
CENRAP was developed to provide an alternative to a
non-radar environment at terminal facilities should an ASR
fail or malfunction. CENRAP sends aircraft radar beacon
target information to the ASR terminal facility equipped
with ARTS.
Changeover Point (COP). A COP indicates the point where
a frequency change is necessary between navigation aids,
when other than the midpoint on an airway, to receive
course guidance from the facility ahead of the aircraft
instead of the one behind. These COPs divide an airway
or route segment and ensure continuous reception of
navigational signals at the prescribed minimum en route
IFR altitude.
Chart Supplement (CS or d-CS for digital Chart Supplement).
Regional booklets published by Aeronautical Information
Services that provides general information (graphic and
textual) about all airports, both VFR and IFR (in the A/FD
section), Notices, Associated Data and Airport Diagrams.
The A/FD section includes runway length and width,
runway surface, load bearing capacity, runway slope,
airport services, and hazards such as birds and reduced
visibility.
Charted Visual Flight Procedure (CVFP). A CVFP may be
established at some towered airports for environmental
or noise considerations, as well as when necessary for the
safety and efficiency of air traffic operations. Designed
primarily for turbojet aircraft, CVFPs depict prominent
landmarks, courses, and recommended altitudes to specific
runways.

Closely Spaced Dependent Approaches. Identifies
dependent approaches to parallel runways spaced less
than 2,500 feet apart where ATC is permitted to apply
reduced diagonal separation and special wake turbulence
procedures. turbulence procedures.
Cockpit Display of Traffic Information (CDTI). The display
and user interface for information about air traffic within
approximately 80 miles. It typically combines and shows
traffic data from TCAS, TIS-B, and ADS-B. Depending on
features, the display may also show terrain, weather, and
navigation information.
Collision Hazard. A condition, event, or circumstance
that could induce an occurrence of a collision or surface
accident or incident.
Columns. See database columns.
Contact Approach. An approach where an aircraft on an
IFR flight plan, having an air traffic control authorization,
operating clear of clouds with at least one mile flight
visibility, and a reasonable expectation of continuing to
the destination airport in those conditions, may deviate
from the instrument approach procedure and proceed to
the destination airport by visual reference to the surface.
This approach is only authorized when requested by the
pilot and the reported ground visibility at the destination
airport is at least one statute mile.
Controlled Flight Into Terrain (CFIT). A situation where a
mechanically normally functioning aircraft is inadvertently
flown into the ground, water, or an obstacle. There are
two basic causes of CFIT accidents; both involve flight
crew situational awareness. One definition of situational
awareness is an accurate perception by pilots of the factors
and conditions currently affecting the safe operation of the
aircraft and the crew. The causes of CFIT are the flight crews’
lack of vertical position awareness or their lack of horizontal
position awareness in relation to terrain and obstacles.
Database Columns. The spaces for data entry on each
record. One column can accommodate one character.
Database Field. The collection of characters needed to
define one item of information.
Database Identifier. A specific geographic point in space
identified on an aeronautical chart and in a naviation
database, officially designated by the controlling state
authority or derived by Jeppesen. It has no ATC function
and should not be used in filing flight plans nor used when
communicating with ATC.
Database Record. A single line of computer data made up
of the fields necessary to define fully a single useful piece
of data.
Decision Altitude (DA). A specified altitude in the precision
approach at which a missed approach must be initiated
if the required visual reference to continue the approach
has not been established. The term “Decision Altitude (DA)”
is referenced to mean sea level and the term “Decision
Height (DH)” is referenced to the threshold elevation. Even
though DH is charted as an altitude above MSL, the U.S.
has adopted the term“DA” as a step toward harmonization
of the United States and international terminology. At
some point, DA will be published for all future instrument
approach procedures with vertical guidance.
Decision Height (DH). See Decision Altitude.
Departure End of Runway (DER). The end of runway
available for the ground run of an aircraft departure. The
end of the runway that is opposite the landing threshold,
sometimes referred to as the stop end of the runway.
Altitude, velocity vector, and direction to all other aircraft
and air traffic control facilities within a specific area.
Automatic dependent surveillance-broadcast (ADS-B)
information is displayed in the flight deck via a cockpit
display of traffic information (CDTI) unit, providing the pilot
with greater situational awareness. ADS-B transmissions
also provide controllers with a more complete picture of
traffic and update that information more frequently than
other surveillance equipment.
Descend Via. A descend via clearance instructs you to follow
the altitudes published on a STAR. You are not authorized to
leave your last assigned altitude unless specifically cleared
to do so. If ATC amends the altitude or route to one that
is different from the published procedure, the rest of the
charted descent procedure is canceled. ATC will assign
you any further route, altitude, or airspeed clearances, as
necessary.
Digital ATIS (D-ATIS). An alternative method of receiving
ATIS reports by aircraft equipped with datalink services
capable of receiving information in the flight deck over
their Aircraft Communications Addressing and Reporting
System (ACARS) unit.
Digital Elevation Model (DEM). A digital representation of
ground surface topography or terrain.

Diverse Vector Area (DVA). An airport may establish a
diverse vector area if it is necessary to vector aircraft below
the minimum vectoring altitude to assist in the efficient
flow of departing traffic. DVA design requirements are
outlined in FAA Order 8260.3 and allow for the vectoring
of aircraft immediately off the departure end of the runway
below the MVA.
Dynamic Magnetic Variation. A field that is simply a
computer model calculated value instead of a measured
value contained in the record for a waypoint.
EFVS Operation. An operation in which visibility conditions
require an EFVS to be used in lieu of natural vision to
perform an approach or landing, determine enhanced
flight visibility, identify required visual references, or
conduct a rollout.
Electronic Flight Bag (EFB). An electronic display system
intended primarily for flight deck or cabin use. EFB devices
can display a variety of aviation data or perform basic
calculations (e.g., performance data, fuel calculations, etc.).
In the past, some of these functions were traditionally
accomplished using paper references or were based on
data provided to the flight crew by an airline’s flight dispatch
function.The scope of the EFB system functionality may also
include various other hosted databases and applications.
Physical EFB displays may use various technologies,
formats, and forms of communication. These devices are
sometimes referred to as auxiliary performance computers
(APC) or laptop auxiliary performance computers (LAPC).
Ellipsoid of Revolution. The surface that results when an
ellipse is rotated about one of its axes.
En Route Obstacle Clearance Areas. Obstacle clearance
areas for en route planning are identified as primary,
secondary, and turning areas, and they are designed to
provide obstacle clearance route protection width for
airways and routes.
Enhanced Flight Vision System (EFVS). An installed aircraft
system which uses an electronic means to provide a display
of the forward external scene topography (the natural or
manmade features of a place or region especially in a way to
show their relative positions and elevation) through the use
of imaging sensors, including but not limited to forward-
looking infrared, millimeter wave radiometry, millimeter
wave radar, or low-light level image intensification. An
EFVS includes the display element, sensors, computers and
power supplies, indications, and controls.
Expanded Service Volume. When ATC or a procedures
specialist requires the use of a NAVAID beyond the
limitations specified for standard service volume, an
expanded service volume (ESV) may be established. See
standard service volume.
Feeder Route. A feeder route is a route depicted on IAP
charts to designate courses for aircraft to proceed from the
en route structure to the IAF. Feeder routes, also referred
to as approach transitions, technically are not considered
approach segments but are an integral part of many IAPs.
Field. See database field.
Final Approach and Takeoff Area (FATO). The FATO is a
defined heliport area over which the final approach to a
hover or a departure is made. The touchdown and lift-off
area (TLOF) where the helicopter is permitted to land is
normally centered in the FATO. A safety area is provided
around the FATO.
Fix. A geographical position determined by visual reference
to the surface, by reference to one or more radio NAVAIDs,
by celestial plotting, or by another navigational device.
Note: Fix is a generic name for a geographical position
and is referred to as a fix, waypoint, intersection, reporting
point, etc.
Flight Information Region (FIR). A FIR is an airspace of
defined dimensions within which Flight Information Service
and Alerting Service are provided. Flight Information Service
(FIS) is a service provided for the purpose of giving advice
and information useful for the safe and efficient conduct
of flights. Alerting Service is a service provided to notify
appropriate organizations regarding aircraft in need of search
and rescue aid, and assist such organizations as required.
Flight Level (FL). A flight level is a level of constant
atmospheric pressure related to a reference datum of
29.92 "Hg. Each flight level is stated in three digits that
represents hundreds of feet. For example, FL 250 represents
an altimeter indication of 25,000 feet.
Floating Waypoints. Floating waypoints represent
airspace fixes at a point in space not directly associated
with a conventional airway. In many cases, they may be
established for such purposes as ATC metering fixes,
holding points, RNAV-direct routing, gateway waypoints,
STAR origination points leaving the en route structure,
and SID terminating points joining the en route structure.
Fly-by (FB) Waypoint. A waypoint that requires the use of
turn anticipation to avoid overshooting the next flight
segment.

Fly-over (FO) Waypoint. A waypoint that precludes any turn
until the waypoint is overflown, and is followed by either
an intercept maneuver of the next flight segment or direct
flight to the next waypoint.
Four Corner Post Configuration. An arrangement of air
traffic pathways in a terminal area that brings incoming
flights over fixes at four corners of the traffic area, while
outbound flights depart between the fixes, thus minimizing
conflicts between arriving and departing traffic.
Gateway Fix. A navigational aid or fix where an aircraft
transitions between the domestic route structure and the
oceanic route airspace.
Geodetic Datum. The reference plane from which geodetic
calculations are made. Or, according to ICAO Annex 15, the
numerical or geometrical quantity or set of such quantities
(mathematical model) that serves as a reference for
computing other quantities in a specific geographic region,
such as the latitude and longitude of a point.
Glidepath Angle (GPA). The angular displacement of the
vertical guidance path from a horizontal plane that passes
through the reference datum point (RDP). This angle is
published on approach charts (e.g., 3.00°, 3.20°, etc.). GPA
is sometimes referred to as vertical path angle (VPA).
Global Navigation Satellite System (GNSS). An umbrella term
adopted by the International Civil Aviation Organization
(ICAO) to encompass any independent satellite navigation
system used by a pilot to perform onboard position
determinations from the satellite data.
Gross Navigation Error (GNE). In the North Atlantic area of
operations, a gross navigation error is a lateral separation
of more than 25 NM from the centerline of an aircraft’s
cleared route, which generates an Oceanic Navigation Error
Report. This report is also generated by a vertical separation
if you are more than 300 feet off your assigned flight level.
Ground Communication Outlet (GCO). An unstaffed,
remotely controlled ground/ground communications
facility. Pilots at uncontrolled airports may contact ATC and
AFSS via very high frequency (VHF) radio to a telephone
connection. This lets pilots obtain an instrument clearance
or close a VFR/IFR flight plan.
Head-Up Display (HUD). See head-up guidance system
(HGS).
Head-up Guidance System (HGS). A system that projects
critical flight data on a display positioned between the pilot
and the windscreen. In addition to showing primary flight
information, the HUD computes an extremely accurate
instrument approach and landing guidance solution, and
displays the result as a guidance cue for head-up viewing
by the pilot.
Height Above Touchdown (HAT). The height of the DA
above touchdown zone elevation (TDZE).
Highway in the Sky (HITS). A graphically intuitive pilot
interface system that provides an aircraft operator with all
of the attitude and guidance inputs required to safely fly
an aircraft in close conformance to air traffic procedures.
Initial Climb Area (ICA). An area beginning at the departure
end of runway (DER) to provide unrestricted climb to at
least 400 feet above DER elevation.
Instrument Approach Waypoint. Fixes used in defining
RNAV IAPs, including the feeder waypoint (FWP), the initial
approach waypoint (IAWP), the intermediate waypoint
(IWP), the final approach waypoint (FAWP), the RWY WP,
and the APT WP, when required.
Instrument Landing System (ILS). A precision instrument
approach system that normally consists of the following
electronic components and visual aids: localizer, glide
slope, outer marker, middle marker, and approach lights.
Instrument Procedure with Vertical Guidance (IPV). Satellite
or flight management system (FMS) lateral navigation
(LNAV) with computed positive vertical guidance based
on barometric or satellite elevation. This term has been
renamed APV.
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO).
ICAO is a specialized agency of the United Nations whose
objective is to develop standard principles and techniques
of international air navigation and to promote development
of civil aviation.
Intersection. Typically, the point at which two VOR radial
position lines cross on a route, usually intersecting at a good
angle for positive indication of position, resulting in a VOR/
VOR fix.
Landing Distance Available (LDA). ICAO defines LDA as the
length of runway, that is declared available and suitable for
the ground run of an aeroplane landing.

Lateral Navigation (LNAV). Azimuth navigation without
positive vertical guidance. This type of navigation is
associated with nonprecision approach procedures or en
route.
Local Area Augmentation System (LAAS). LAAS further
increases the accuracy of GPS and improves signal integrity
warnings.
Localizer Performance with Vertical Guidance (LPV). LPV is
one of the four lines of approach minimums found on an
RNAV (GPS) approach chart. Lateral guidance accuracy is
equivalent to a localizer. The HAT is published as a DA since
it uses an electronic glide path that is not dependent on
any ground equipment or barometric aiding and may be
as low as 200 feet and 1⁄2 SM visibility depending on the
airport terrain and infrastructure. WAAS avionics approved
for LPV is required. Baro-VNAV is not authorized to fly the
LPV line of minimums on a RNAV (GPS) procedure since it
uses an internally generated descent path that is subject to
cold temperature effects and incorrect altimeter settings.
Loss of Separation. An occurrence or operation that results
in less than prescribed separation between aircraft, or
between an aircraft and a vehicle, pedestrian, or object.
LPV. See Localizer Performance with Vertical Guidance.
Magnetic Variation. The difference in degrees between
the measured values of true north and magnetic north at
that location.
Maximum Authorized Altitude (MAA). An MAA is a
published altitude representing the maximum usable
altitude or flight level for an airspace structure or route
segment. It is the highest altitude on a Federal airway, jet
route, RNAV low or high route, or other direct route for
which an MEA is designated at which adequate reception
of navigation signals is assured.
Metering Fix. A fix along an established route over which
aircraft are metered prior to entering terminal airspace.
Normally, this fix should be established at a distance from
the airport which facilitates a profile descent 10,000 feet
above airport elevation (AAE) or above.
Mid-RVR. The RVR readout values obtained from sensors
located midfield of the runway.
Mileage Break. A point on a route where the leg segment
mileage ends, and a new leg segment mileage begins, often
at a route turning point.
Military Airspace Management System (MAMS). A
Department of Defense system to collect and disseminate
information on the current status of special use airspace.
This information is provided to the Special Use Airspace
Management System (SAMS). The electronic interface
also provides SUA schedules and historical activation and
utilization data.
Minimum Crossing Altitude (MCA). An MCA is the lowest
altitude at certain fixes at which the aircraft must cross
when proceeding in the direction of a higher minimum en
route IFR altitude. MCAs are established in all cases where
obstacles intervene to prevent pilots from maintaining
obstacle clearance during a normal climb to a higher MEA
after passing a point beyond which the higher MEA applies.
Minimum Descent Altitude (MDA). The lowest altitude,
expressed in feet above mean sea level, to which descent
is authorized on final approach or during circle-to-land
maneuvering in execution of a standard instrument
approach procedure where no electronic glide slope is
provided.
Minimum En Route Altitude (MEA). The MEA is the lowest
published altitude between radio fixes that assures
acceptable navigational signal coverage and meets
obstacle clearance requirements between those fixes. The
MEA prescribed for a Federal Airway or segment, RNAV low
or high route, or other direct route applies to the entire
width of the airway, segment, or route between the radio
fixes defining the airway, segment, or route.
Minimum IFR Altitude (MIA). Minimum altitudes for IFR
operations are prescribed in 14 CFR Part 91. These MIAs are
published on IFR charts and prescribed in 14 CFR Part 95
for airways and routes, and in 14 CFR Part 97 for standard
instrument approach procedures.
Minimum Navigation Performance Specifications (MNPS).
A set of standards that require aircraft to have a minimum
navigation performance capability in order to operate in
MNPS designated airspace. In addition, aircraft must be
certified by their State of Registry for MNPS operation.
Under certain conditions, non-MNPS aircraft can operate
in MNPS airspace, however, standard oceanic separation
minima is provided between the non-MNPS aircraft and
other traffic.
Minimum Obstruction Clearance Altitude (MOCA). The
MOCA is the lowest published altitude in effect between
radio fixes on VOR airways, off-airway routes, or route
segments that meets obstacle clearance requirements
for the entire route segment. This altitude also assures
acceptable navigational signal coverage only within 22
NM of a VOR.

Minimum Reception Altitude (MRA). An MRA is determined
by FAA flight inspection traversing an entire route of flight
to establish the minimum altitude the navigation signal can
be received for the route and for off-course NAVAID facilities
that determine a fix. When the MRA at the fix is higher than
the MEA, an MRA is established for the fix, and is the lowest
altitude at which an intersection can be determined.
Minimum Safe Altitude (MSA). MSAs are published for
emergency use on IAP charts. For conventional navigation
systems, the MSA is normally based on the primary
omnidirectional facility on which the IAP is predicated.
For RNAV approaches, the MSA is based on the runway
waypoint (RWY WP) for straight-in approaches, or the
airport waypoint (APT WP) for circling approaches. For
GPS approaches, the MSA center is the Missed Approach
Waypoint (MAWP).
Minimum Vectoring Altitude (MVA). Minimum vectoring
altitude charts are developed for areas where there are
numerous minimum vectoring altitudes due to variable
terrain features or man-made obstacles. MVAs are
established for use by ATC when radar ATC is exercised.
Missed Approach Holding Waypoint. An approach
waypoint sequenced during the holding portion of the
missed approach procedure that is a fly-over waypoint.
Missed Approach Waypoint (MAWP). An approach waypoint
sequenced during the missed approach procedure that is
a fly-over waypoint.
National Airspace System (NAS). Consists of a complex
collection of facilities, systems, equipment, procedures, and
airports operated by thousands of people to provide a safe
and efficient flying environment.
Navigational Gap. A navigational course guidance gap,
referred to as an MEA gap, describes a distance along an
airway or route segment where a gap in navigational signal
coverage exists. The navigational gap may not exceed a
specific distance that varies directly with altitude.
Next Generation Air Transportation System (NextGen).
Ongoing, wide-ranging transformation of the National
Airspace System (NAS). NextGen represents an evolution
from a ground-based system of air traffic control to a satellite-
based system of air traffic management.
Non-Directional Radio Beacon (NDB). An L/MF or UHF
radio beacon transmitting nondirectional signals whereby
the pilot of an aircraft equipped with direction finding
equipment can determine bearing to or from the radio
beacon and “home”on or track to or from the station. When
the radio beacon is installed in conjunction with the ILS
marker, it is normally called a compass locator.
Non-RNAV DP. A DP whose ground track is based on
ground-based NAVAIDS and/or dead reckoning navigation.
Obstacle Clearance Surface (OCS). An inclined or level
surface associated with a defined area for obstruction
evaluation.
Obstacle Departure Procedure (ODP). A procedure that
provides obstacle clearance. ODPs do not include ATC
related climb requirements. In fact, the primary emphasis
of ODP design is to use the least erroneous route of flight to
the en route structure while attempting to accommodate
typical departure routes.
Obstacle Identification Surface (OIS). The design of a
departure procedure is based on FAA Order 8260.3, a living
document that is updated frequently. Departure design
criteria assumes an initial climb of 200 Ft/NM after crossing
the departure end of the runway (DER) at a height of at
least 35 feet above the ground. Assuming a 200 Ft/NM
climb, the departure is structured to provide at least 48 Ft/
NM of clearance above objects that do not penetrate the
obstacle slope. The slope, known as the OIS, is based on a
40 to 1 ratio, which is the equivalent of a 152 Ft/NM slope.
Off-Airway Routes. The FAA prescribes altitudes governing
the operation of aircraft under IFR for fairway routes in a
similar manner to those on federal airways, jet routes, area
navigation low or high altitude routes, and other direct
routes for which an MEA is designated.
Off-Route Obstruction Clearance Altitude (OROCA). An off-
route altitude that provides obstruction clearance with a
1,000-foot buffer in nonmountainous terrain areas and a
2,000-foot buffer in designated mountainous areas within
the U.S. This altitude may not provide signal coverage from
groundbased navigational aids, air traffic control radar, or
communications coverage.
Operations Specifications (OpSpecs). A published
document providing the conditions under which an air carrier
and operator for compensation or hire must operate in order
to retain approval from the FAA.

Pilot Briefing Information. The current format for charted
IAPs issued by Aeronautical Information Services. The
information is presented in a logical order facilitating
pilot briefing of the procedures. Charts include formatted
information required for quick pilot or flight crew reference
located at the top of the chart.
Point-in-Space (PinS) Approach. An approach normally
developed to heliports that do not meet the IFR heliport
design standards but meet the standards for a VFR
heliport. A helicopter PinS approach can be developed
using conventional NAVAIDs or RNAV systems. These
procedures have either a VFR or visual segment between the
MAP and the landing area. The procedure specifies a course
and distance from the MAP to the heliport(s) and includes a
note to proceed VFR or visually from the MAP to the heliport,
or conduct the missed approach.
Positive Course Guidance (PCG). The continuous display
of accurate course and flight path data that enables a pilot
to precisely fly along a specific track or course using RNAV,
a ground-based NAVAID or a radar vector. For RNAV or a
ground-based NAVAID, the guidance is displayed in the
aircraft; for a radar vector, the guidance data is displayed
in the radar facility
Precision Runway Monitor (PRM). Provides air traffic
controllers with high precision secondary surveillance
data for aircraft on final approach to parallel runways that
have extended centerlines separated by less than 4,300
feet. High resolution color monitoring displays (FMA) are
required to present surveillance track data to controllers
along with detailed maps depicting approaches and a no
transgression zone.
Preferential Departure Route (PDR). A specific departure
route from an airport or terminal area to an en route point
where there is no further need for flow control. It may be
included in an instrument Departure Procedure (DP) or a
Preferred IFR Route.
Preferred IFR Routes. A system of preferred IFR routes
guides you in planning your route of flight to minimize
route changes during the operational phase of flight, and
to aid in the efficient orderly management of air traffic
using federal airways.
Principal Operations Inspector (POI). Scheduled air carriers
and operators for compensation or hire are assigned a POI
who works directly with the company and coordinates FAA
operating approval.
Record. See Database Record.
Reduced Vertical Separation Minimums (RVSM). RVSM
airspace is where air traffic control separates aircraft by
a minimum of 1,000 feet vertically between flight level
(FL) 290 and FL 410 inclusive. RVSM airspace is special
qualification airspace; the operator and the aircraft used
by the operator must be approved by the Administrator.
Air traffic control notifies operators of RVSM by providing
route planing information.
Reference Landing Speed (VREF). The speed of the aircraft,
in a specified landing configuration, at the point where it
descends through the 50-foot height in the determination
of the landing distance.
Remote Communications Outlet (RCO). An unmanned
communications facility remotely controlled by air traffic
personnel. RCOs serve FSSs and may be UHF or VHF. RCOs
extend the communication range of the air traffic facility.
RCOs were established to provide ground-to-ground
communications between air traffic control specialists
and pilots located at a satellite airport for delivering en
route clearances, issuing departure authorizations, and
acknowledging IFR cancellations or departure/landing
times.
Reporting Point. A geographical location in relation
to which the position of an aircraft is reported. (See
Compulsory Reporting Points).
Required Navigation Performance (RNP). RNP is a statement
of the navigation performance necessary for operation
within a defined airspace. On-board monitoring and
alerting is required.
RNAV DP. A Departure Procedure developed for RNAV-
equipped aircraft whose ground track is based on satellite
or DME/DME navigation systems.
Roll-Out RVR. The RVR readout values obtained from
sensors located nearest the rollout end of the runway.
Runway Heading. The magnetic direction that corresponds
with the runway centerline extended, not the painted
runway numbers on the runway. Pilots cleared to “fly or
maintain runway heading” are expected to fly or maintain
the published heading that corresponds with the extended
centerline of the departure runway (until otherwise
instructed by ATC), and are not to apply drift correction
(e.g., RWY 4, actual magnetic heading of the runway
centerline 044.22°, fly 044°).

Runway Hotspots. Locations on a particular airport that
historically have hazardous intersections. Hot spots alert
pilots to the fact that there may be a lack of visibility at
certain points or the tower may be unable to see that
particular intersection. Whatever the reason, pilots need
to be aware that these hazardous intersections exist and
they should be increasingly vigilant when approaching
and taxiing through these intersections. Pilots are typically
notified of these areas by a Letter to Airmen or by accessing
the FAA Office of Runway Safety.
Runway Incursion. An occurrence at an airport involving
an aircraft, vehicle, person, or object on the ground that
creates a collision hazard or results in a loss of separation
with an aircraft that is taking off, intending to take off,
landing, or intending to land.
Runway Safety Program (RSP). Designed to create and
execute a plan of action that reduces the number of runway
incursions at the nation’s airports.
Runway Visual Range (RVR). An estimate of the maximum
distance at which the runway, or the specified lights or
markers delineating it, can be seen from a position above
a specific point on the runway centerline. RVR is normally
determined by visibility sensors or transmissometers
located alongside and higher than the centerline of the
runway. RVR is reported in hundreds of feet.
Runway Visibility Value (RVV). The visibility determined
for a particular runway by a transmissometer. A meter
provides a continuous indication of the visibility (reported
in miles or fractions of miles) for the runway. RVV is used
in lieu of prevailing visibility in determining minimums for
a particular runway.
Significant Point. [ICAO Annex 11] A specified geographical
location used in defining an ATS route or the flightpath
of an aircraft and for other navigation and ATS purposes.
Special Instrument Approach Procedure. A procedure
approved by the FAA for individual operators, but not
published in 14 CFR Part 97 for public use.
Special Use Airspace Management System (SAMS). A
joint FAA and military program designed to improve civilian
access to special use airspace by providing information on
whether the airspace is active or scheduled to be active. The
information is available to authorized users via an Internet
website.
Standard Instrument Departure (SID). An ATC requested
and developed departure route designed to increase capacity
of terminal airspace, effectively control the flow of traffic
with minimal communication, and reduce environmental
impact through noise abatement procedures.
Standard Service Volume. Most air navigation radio aids
that provide positive course guidance have a designated
standard service volume (SSV). The SSV defines the
reception limits of unrestricted NAVAIDS that are usable for
random/unpublished route navigation. Standard service
volume limitations do not apply to published IFR routes or
procedures. See the AIM (Chapter 1) for the SSV for specific
NAVAID types.
Standard Terminal Arrival (STAR). Provides a common
method for departing the en route structure and navigating
to your destination. A STAR is a preplanned instrument
flight rule ATC arrival procedure published for pilot use
in graphic and textual form to simplify clearance delivery
procedures. STARs provide you with a transition from
the en route structure to an outer fix or an instrument
approach fix or arrival waypoint in the terminal area. STARs
usually terminate with an instrument or visual approach
procedure, but may also terminate with a heading or course
to fly for radar vectors.
Standard Terminal Arrival (STAR) Charts. Designed to
expedite air traffic control arrival procedures and to
facilitate transition between en route and instrument
approach operations. Each STAR procedure is presented
as a separate chart and may serve a single airport or more
than one airport in a given geographical location
Standardized Taxi Routes. Coded taxi routes that follow
typical taxiway traffic patterns to move aircraft between
gates and runways. ATC issues clearances using these
coded routes to reduce radio communication and eliminate
taxi instruction misinterpretation.
STAR Transition. A published segment used to connect
one or more en route airways, jet routes, or RNAV routes
to the basic STAR procedure. It is one of several routes that
bring traffic from different directions into one STAR. STARs
are published for airports with procedures authorized by
the FAA, and these STARs are included at the front of each
Terminal Procedures Publication regional booklet.
Start End of Runway (SER). The beginning of the takeoff
runway available.

Station Declination. The angular difference between true
north and the zero radial of a VOR at the time the VOR was
last site-checked.
Surface Incident. An event during which authorized or
unauthorized/unapproved movement occurs in the
movement area or an occurrence in the movement area
associated with the operation of an aircraft that affects or
could affect the safety of flight.
Surface Movement Guidance Control System (SMGCS).
Facilitates the safe movement of aircraft and vehicles
at airports where scheduled air carriers are conducting
authorized operations. The SMGCS low visibility taxi plan
includes the improvement of taxiway and runway signs,
markings, and lighting, as well as the creation of SMGCS
low visibility taxi route charts.
Synthetic Vision Guidance System (SVGS). SVGS is a
combination of flight guidance display technology and
high precision position assurance monitors. The SVGS flight
instrument display provides a continuous, geo-spatially
correct depiction of the external scene topography,
including obstacles, augmented by the display of the
runway of intended landing. The SVGS display may be
implemented on a head down Primary Flight Display, and/
or a Head-Up Display (HUD). SVGS includes additional
symbology elements, integrity and performance monitors
and annunciations that support and enable low visibility
operations. Additional flight instrument symbology and
monitors to assure accurate rendering of the external
scene are included.
Synthetic Vision System (SVS). An electronic means to
display a synthetic vision image of the external scene
topography to the flight crew.
System Wide Information Management (SWIM).
An advanced technology program designed to facilitate
greater sharing of Air Traffic Management (ATM) system
information, such as airport operational status, weather
information, flight data, status of special use airspace,
and National Airspace System (NAS) restrictions. SWIM
supports current and future NAS programs by providing
flexible and secure information management architecture for
sharing NAS information.
Takeoff Distance Available (TODA). ICAO defines TODA as
the length of the takeoff runway available plus the length
of the clearway, if provided.
Takeoff Runway Available (TORA). ICAO defines TORA as
the length of runway declared available and suitable for
the ground run of an aeroplane takeoff.
Tangent Point (TP). The point on the VOR/DME RNAV route
centerline from which a line perpendicular to the route
centerline would pass through the reference facility.
Terminal Arrival Area (TAA). TAAs are the method by which
aircraft are transitioned from the RNAV en route structure
to the terminal area with minimal ATC interaction. The TAA
consists of a designated volume of airspace designed to
allow aircraft to enter a protected area, offering guaranteed
obstacle clearance where the initial approach course is
intercepted based on the location of the aircraft relative
to the airport.
Threshold. The beginning of the part of the runway usable
for landing.
Top Of Climb (TOC). An identifiable waypoint representing
the point at which cruise altitude is first reached. TOC is
calculated based on your current aircraft altitude, climb
speed, and cruise altitude. There can only be one TOC
waypoint at a time.
Top Of Descent (TOD). Generally utilized in flight
management systems, top of descent is an identifiable
waypoint representing the point at which descent is first
initiated from cruise altitude. TOD is generally calculated
using the destination elevation (if available) and the
descent speed schedule.
Touchdown and Lift-Off Area (TLOF). The TLOF is a load
bearing, usually paved, area at a heliport where the
helicopter is permitted to land. The TLOF can be located
at ground or rooftop level, or on an elevated structure. The
TLOF is normally centered in the FATO.
Touchdown RVR. The RVR visibility readout values
obtained from sensors serving the runway touchdown zone.
Touchdown Zone Elevation (TDZE). The highest elevation
in the first 3,000 feet of the landing surface.
Tower En Route Control (TEC). The control of IFR en route
traffic within delegated airspace between two or more
adjacent approach control facilities. This service is designed
to expedite air traffic and reduces air traffic control and
pilot communication requirements.
TRACAB. A new type of air traffic facility that consists of
a radar approach control facility located in the tower cab of
the primary airport, as opposed to a separate room.
Traffic Information Service-Broadcast (TIS-B). An air
traffic surveillance system that combines all available traffic
information on a single display.

Traffic Management Advisor (TMA). A software suite that
helps air traffic controllers to sequence arriving air traffic.
Transition Altitude (QNH). The altitude in the vicinity of an
airport at or below which the vertical position of an aircraft
is controlled by reference to altitudes (MSL).
Transition Height (QFE). Transition height is the height in
the vicinity of an airport at or below which the vertical
position of an aircraft is expressed in height above the
airport reference datum.
Transition Layer. Transition layer is the airspace between
the transition altitude and the transition level. Aircraft
descending through the transition layer will set altimeters
to local station pressure, while departing aircraft climbing
through the transition layer will be using standard altimeter
setting (QNE) of 29.92 inches of Mercury, 1013.2 millibars,
or 1013.2 hectopascals.
Transition Level (QNE). The lowest flight level available for
use above the transition altitude.
Turn Anticipation. The capability of RNAV systems to
determine the point along a course, prior to a turn WP,
where a turn should be initiated to provide a smooth path
to intercept the succeeding course and to enunciate the
information to the pilot.
Turn WP (Turning Point). A WP that identifies a change from
one course to another.
Universal Communications (UNICOM). An air-ground
communication facility operated by a private agency to
provide advisory service at uncontrolled aerodromes and
airports.
User-Defined Waypoint. User-defined waypoints typically
are created by pilots for use in their own random RNAV
direct navigation. They are newly established, unpublished
airspace fixes that are designated geographic locations/
positions that help provide positive course guidance for
navigation and a means of checking progress on a flight.
They may or may not be actually plotted by the pilot on
en route charts, but would normally be communicated to
ATC in terms of bearing and distance or latitude/longitude.
An example of user-defined waypoints typically includes
those derived from database-driven area navigation (RNAV)
systems whereby latitude/longitude coordinate-based
waypoints are generated by various means including
keyboard input, and even electronic map mode functions
used to establish waypoints with a cursor on the display.
Another example is an offset phantom waypoint, which
is a point in space formed by a bearing and distance from
NAVAIDs, such as VORs, VORTACs, and TACANs, using a
variety of navigation systems.
User Request Evaluation Tool (URET). The URET helps
provide enhanced, automated flight data management.
URET is an automated tool provided at each radar position
in selected en route facilities. It uses flight and radar data
to determine present and future trajectories for all active
and proposed aircraft flights. A graphic plan display
depicts aircraft, traffic, and notification of predicted
conflicts. Graphic routes for current plans and trial plans
are displayed upon controller request. URET can generate
a predicted conflict of two aircraft, or between aircraft
and airspace.
Vertical Navigation (VNAV). Traditionally, the only way
to get glidepath information during an approach was to
use a ground-based NAVAID, but modern area navigation
systems allow flight crews to display an internally
generated descent path that allows a constant rate descent
to minimums during approaches that would otherwise
include multiple level-offs.
Vertical Navigation Planning. Included within certain STARs
is information provided to help you reduce the amount of
low altitude flying time for high performance aircraft, like
jets and turboprops. An expected altitude is given for a key
fix along the route. By knowing an intermediate altitude in
advance when flying a high performance aircraft, you can
plan the power or thrust settings and aircraft configurations
that result in the most efficient descent, in terms of time,
fuel requirements, and engine wear.
Visual Approach. A visual approach is an ATC authorization
for an aircraft on an IFR flight plan to proceed visually to
the airport of intended landing; it is not an IAP. Also, there
is no missed approach segment. When it is operationally
beneficial, ATC may authorize pilots to conduct a visual
approach to the airport in lieu of the published IAP. A visual
approach can be initiated by a pilot or the controller.
Visual Climb Over the Airport (VCOA). An option to allow
an aircraft to climb over the airport with visual reference
to obstacles to attain a suitable altitude from which to
proceed with an IFR departure.
Waypoints. Area navigation waypoints are specified
geographical locations, or fixes, used to define an area
navigation route or the flightpath of an aircraft employing
area navigation. Waypoints may be any of the following
types: predefined, published, floating, user-defined, fly-by,
or fly-over.

Waypoint (WP). A predetermined geographical position
used for route/instrument approach definition, progress
reports, published VFR routes, visual reporting points or
points for transitioning and/or circumnavigating controlled
and/or special use airspace, that is defined relative
to a VORTAC station or in terms of latitude/longitude
coordinates.
Wide Area Augmentation System (WAAS). A method of
navigation based on GPS. Ground correction stations transmit
position corrections that enhance system accuracy and add
vertical navigation (VNAV) features.