Figure 1-23. A complex aircraft.
Figure 1-24. Type of aircraft flown by an airline transport pilot.
Figure 1-22. A typical aircraft a private pilot might fly.
active pilots. It allows command of any aircraft (subject
to appropriate ratings) for any noncommercial purpose
and gives almost unlimited authority to fly under VFR.
Passengers may be carried and flight in furtherance of a
business is permitted; however, a private pilot may not be
compensated in any way for services as a pilot, although
passengers can pay a pro rata share of flight expenses, such
as fuel or rental costs. If training under 14 CFR part 61,
experience requirements include at least 40 hours of piloting
time, including 20 hours of flight with an instructor and 10
hours of solo flight. [Figure 1-22]
Commercial Pilot
A commercial pilot may be compensated for flying. Training
for the certificate focuses on a better understanding of
aircraft systems and a higher standard of airmanship. The
Commercial Pilot Certificate itself does not allow a pilot
to fly in instrument meteorological conditions (IMC), and
commercial pilots without an instrument rating are restricted
to daytime flight within 50 NM when flying for hire.
A commercial airplane pilot must be able to operate
a complex airplane, as a specific number of hours of
complex (or turbine-powered) aircraft time are among
the prerequisites, and at least a portion of the practical
examination is performed in a complex aircraft. A complex
aircraft must have retractable landing gear, movable flaps,
and a controllable-pitch propeller. See 14 CFR part 61,
section 61.31(e) for additional information. [Figure 1-23]
Airline Transport Pilot
The airline transport pilot (ATP) is tested to the highest level
of piloting ability. The ATP certificate is a prerequisite for
serving as a PIC and second in command (SIC) of scheduled
airline operations. It is also a prerequisite for serving as a PIC
in select charter and fractional operations. The minimum pilot
experience is 1,500 hours of flight time. In addition, the pilot
must be at least 23 years of age, be able to read, write, speak,
and understand the English language, and be “of good moral
standing.” A pilot may obtain an ATP certificate with restricted
privileges enabling him/her to serve as an SIC in scheduled
airline operations. The minimum pilot experience is reduced
based upon specific academic and flight training experience.
The minimum age to be eligible is 21 years. [Figure 1-24]
Selecting a Flight School
Selecting a flight school is an important consideration in
the flight training process. FAA-approved training centers,
FAA-approved pilot schools, noncertificated flying schools,
and independent flight instructors conduct flight training in
the United States. All flight training is conducted under the
auspices of the FAA following the regulations outlined in
14 CFR parts 142, 141, or 61. Training centers, also referred
to as flight academies, operate under 14 CFR part 142 and
are certificated by the FAA. Application for certification
is voluntary and the training center must meet stringent
requirements for personnel, equipment, maintenance,
facilities, and must teach a curriculum approved by the
FAA. Training centers typically utilize a number of flight
simulation training devices as part of its curricula. Flight
training conducted at a training center is primarily done
under contract to airlines and other commercial operators
in transport or turbine aircraft, however many also provide

flight training for the private pilot certificate, commercial
pilot certificate, instrument rating, and ATP certificate.
Flight schools operating under 14 CFR part 141 are
certificated by the FAA. Application for certification is
voluntary and the school must meet stringent requirements
for personnel, equipment, maintenance, facilities, and must
teach an established curriculum, which includes a training
course outline (TCO) approved by the FAA. The certificated
schools may qualify for a ground school rating and a flight
school rating. In addition, the school may be authorized
to give its graduates practical (flight) tests and knowledge
(computer administered written) tests. The FAA Pilot School
Search database located at http://av-info.faa.gov/PilotSchool.
asp, lists certificated ground and flight schools and the pilot
training courses each school offers.
Enrollment in a 14 CFR part 141 flight school ensures
quality, continuity, and offers a structured approach to flight
training because these facilities must document the training
curriculum and have their flight courses approved by the
FAA. These strictures allow 14 CFR part 141 schools to
complete certificates and ratings in fewer flight hours, which
can mean a savings on the cost of flight training for the
student pilot. For example, the minimum requirement for a
Private Pilot Certificate is 35 hours in a part 141-certificated
school and 40 hours in a part 61-certificated school. (This
difference may be insignificant for a Private Pilot Certificate
because the national average indicates most pilots require 60
to 75 hours of flight training.)
Many excellent flight schools find it impractical to qualify
for the FAA part 141 certificates and are referred to as part
61 schools. 14 CFR part 61 outlines certificate and rating
requirements for pilot certification through noncertificated
schools and individual flight instructors. It also states what
knowledge-based training must be covered and how much
flight experience is required for each certificate and rating.
Flight schools and flight instructors who train must adhere
to the statutory requirements and train pilots to the standards
found in 14 CFR part 61.
One advantage of flight training under 14 CFR part 61 is its
flexibility. Flight lessons can be tailored to the individual
student, because 14 CFR part 61 dictates the required
minimum flight experience and knowledge-based training
necessary to gain a specific pilot’s license, but it does not
stipulate how the training is to be organized. This flexibility
can also be a disadvantage because a flight instructor who
fails to organize the flight training can cost a student pilot
time and expense through repetitious training. One way for
a student pilot to avoid this problem is to ensure the flight
instructor has a well-documented training syllabus.
How To Find a Reputable Flight Program
To obtain information about pilot training, contact the local
FSDO, which maintains a current file on all schools within its
district. The choice of a flight school depends on what type of
certificate is sought, and whether an individual wishes to fly
as a sport pilot or wishes to pursue a career as a professional
pilot. Another consideration is the amount of time that can
be devoted to training. Ground and flight training should
be obtained as regularly and frequently as possible because
this assures maximum retention of instruction and the
achievement of requisite proficiency.
Do not make the determination based on financial concerns
alone, because the quality of training is very important.
Prior to making a final decision, visit the schools under
consideration and talk with management, instructors, and
students. Request a personal tour of the flight school facility.
Be inquisitive and proactive when searching for a flight
school, do some homework, and develop a checklist of
questions by talking to pilots and reading articles in flight
magazines. The checklist should include questions about
aircraft reliability and maintenance practices, and questions
for current students such as whether or not there is a safe,
clean aircraft available when they are scheduled to fly.
Questions for the training facility should be aimed at
determining if the instruction fits available personal time.
What are the school’s operating hours? Does the facility have
dedicated classrooms available for ground training required
by the FAA? Is there an area available for preflight briefings,
postflight debriefings, and critiques? Are these rooms private
in nature in order to provide a nonthreatening environment
in which the instructor can explain the content and outcome
of the flight without making the student feel self-conscious?
Examine the facility before committing to any flight training.
Evaluate the answers on the checklist, and then take time to
think things over before making a decision. This proactive
approach to choosing a flight school will ensure a student
pilot contracts with a flight school or flight instructor best
suited to their individual needs.
How To Choose a Certificated Flight Instructor (CFI)
Whether an individual chooses to train under 14 CFR part
141 or part 61, the key to an effective flight program is the
quality of the ground and flight training received from the
CFI. The flight instructor assumes total responsibility for
training an individual to meet the standards required for
certification within an ever-changing operating environment.
A CFI should possess an understanding of the learning
process, knowledge of the fundamentals of teaching, and

the ability to communicate effectively with the student pilot.
During the certification process, a flight instructor applicant
is tested on the practical application of these skills in specific
teaching situations. The flight instructor is crucial to the
scenario-based training program endorsed by the FAA. He
or she is trained to function in the learning environment as an
advisor and guide for the learner. The duties, responsibilities,
and authority of the CFI include the following:
Orient the student to the scenario-based training
system
Help the student become a confident planner and
inflight manager of each flight and a critical evaluator
of their own performance
Help the student understand the knowledge
requirements present in real world applications
Diagnose learning difficulties and help the student
overcome them
Evaluate student progress and maintain appropriate
records
Provide continuous review of student learning
Should a student pilot find the selected CFI is not training in
a manner conducive for learning, or the student and CFI do
not have compatible schedules, the student pilot should find
another CFI. Choosing the right CFI is important because the
quality of instruction and the knowledge and skills acquired
from their flight instructor affect a student pilot’s entire
flying career.
The Student Pilot
The first step in becoming a pilot is to select a type of aircraft.
FAA rules for obtaining a pilot’s certificate differ depending
on the type of aircraft flown. Individuals can choose among
airplanes, gyroplanes, weight-shift, helicopters, powered
parachutes, gliders, balloons, or airships. A pilot does not
need a certificate to fly ultralight vehicles.
Basic Requirements
A student pilot is one who is being trained by an instructor
pilot for his or her first full certificate, and is permitted
to fly alone (solo) under specific, limited circumstances.
Before a student pilot may be endorsed to fly solo, that
student must have a Student Pilot Certificate. There are
multiple ways that an aspiring pilot can obtain their Student
Pilot Certificate. The application may be processed by an
FAA inspector or technician, an FAA-Designated Pilot
Examiner, a Certified Flight Instructor (CFI), or an Airman
Certification Representative (ACR). If the application is
completed electronically, the authorized person will submit
the application to the FAA’s Airman Certification Branch
(AFS-760) in Oklahoma City, OK, via the Integrated
Airman Certification and Rating Application (IACRA). If
the application is completed on paper, it must be sent to
the local Flight Standards District Office (FSDO), who will
forward it to AFS-760. Once the application is processed, the
applicant will receive the Student Pilot Certificate by mail at
the address provided on the application.
The aforementioned process will become effective on April
1, 2016. The new certificate will be printed on a plastic card,
which will replace the paper certificate that was issued in the
past. The plastic card certificate will not have an expiration
date. Paper certificates issued prior to the new process will
still expire according to the date on the certificate; however,
under the new process, paper certificates cannot be renewed.
Once the paper certificate expires, the Student Pilot must
submit a new application under the new process. Another
significant change in the new process is that flight instructors
will now make endorsements for solo privileges in the
Student Pilot’s logbook, instead of endorsing the Student
Pilot Certificate.
To be eligible for a Student Pilot Certificate, the applicant
must:
Be at least 16 years of age (14 years of age to pilot a
glider or balloon).
Be able to read, speak, write, and understand the
English language.
Medical Certification Requirements
The second step in becoming a pilot is to obtain a medical
certificate (if the choice of aircraft is an airplane, helicopter,
gyroplane, or an airship). (The FAA suggests the individual
get a medical certificate before beginning flight training to
avoid the expense of flight training that cannot be continued
due to a medical condition.) Balloon or glider pilots do not
need a medical certificate, but do need to write a statement
certifying that no medical defect exists that would prevent
them from piloting a balloon or glider. The new sport pilot
category does not require a medical examination; a driver’s
license can be used as proof of medical competence.
Applicants who fail to meet certain requirements or who
have physical disabilities which might limit, but not
prevent, their acting as pilots, should contact the nearest
FAA office. Anyone requesting an FAA Medical Clearance,
Medical Certificate, or Student Pilot Medical Certificate can
electronically complete an application through the FAA’s
MedXPress system available at https://medxpress.faa.gov/.
A medical certificate is obtained by passing a physical
examination administered by a doctor who is an FAA-
authorized AME. There are approximately 6,000
FAA-authorized AMEs in the nation. To find an AME near

you, go to the FAA’s AME locator at www.faa.gov/pilots/
amelocator/. Medical certificates are designated as first class,
second class, or third class. Generally, first class is designed
for the airline transport pilot; second class for the commercial
pilot; and third class for the student, recreational, and private
pilot. A Student Pilot Certificate can be processed by an FAA
inspector or technician, an FAA Designated pilot examiner
(DPE), an Airman Certification Representative (ACR), or a
Certified Flight Instructor (CFI). This certificate allows an
individual who is being trained by a flight instructor to fly
alone (solo) under specific, limited circumstances and must
be carried with the student pilot while exercising solo flight
privileges. The Student Pilot Certificate is only required
when exercising solo flight privileges. The new plastic
student certificate does not have an expiration date. For
airmen who were issued a paper certificate, that certificate
will remain valid until its expiration date. A paper certificate
cannot be renewed. When the paper certificate expires, a new
application must be completed via the IACRA system, and
a new plastic certificate will be issued.
Student Pilot Solo Requirements
Once a student has accrued sufficient training and experience,
a CFI can endorse the student’s logbook to authorize limited
solo flight in a specific type (make and model) of aircraft.
A student pilot may not carry passengers, fly in furtherance
of a business, or operate an aircraft outside of the various
endorsements provided by the flight instructor. There is no
minimum aeronautical knowledge or experience requirement
for the issuance of a Student Pilot Certificate, however, the
applicant must be at least 16 years of age (14 years of age for
a pilot for glider or balloon), and they must be able to read,
speak, write and understand the English language. There are,
however, minimum aeronautical knowledge and experience
requirements for student pilots to solo.
Becoming a Pilot
The course of instruction a student pilot follows depends on
the type of certificate sought. It should include the ground and
flight training necessary to acquire the knowledge and skills
required to safely and efficiently function as a certificated
pilot in the selected category and class of aircraft. The
specific knowledge and skill areas for each category and
class of aircraft are outlined in 14 CFR part 61. Eligibility,
aeronautical knowledge, proficiency, and aeronautical
requirements can be found in 14 CFR part 61.
Recreational Pilot, see subpart D
Private Pilot, see subpart E
Sport Pilot, see subpart J
The knowledge-based portion of training is obtained through
FAA handbooks such as this one, textbooks, and other sources
of training and testing materials which are available in print
form from the Superintendent of Documents, GPO, and
online at the Regulatory Support Division: www.faa.gov/
about/office_org/headquarters_offices/avs/offices/afs/afs600.
The CFI may also use commercial publications as a source
of study materials, especially for aircraft categories where
government materials are limited. A student pilot should
follow the flight instructor’s advice on what and when to
study. Planning a definite study program and following it as
closely as possible will help in scoring well on the knowledge
test. Haphazard or disorganized study habits usually result
in an unsatisfactory score.
In addition to learning aeronautical knowledge, such as the
principles of flight, a student pilot is also required to gain
skill in flight maneuvers. The selected category and class of
aircraft determines the type of flight skills and number of
flight hours to be obtained. There are four steps involved in
learning a flight maneuver:
The CFI introduces and demonstrates flight maneuver
to the student.
The CFI talks the student pilot through the maneuver.
The student pilot practices the maneuver under CFI
supervision.
The CFI authorizes the student pilot to practice the
maneuver solo.
Once the student pilot has shown proficiency in the required
knowledge areas, flight maneuvers, and accrued the required
amount of flight hours, the CFI endorses the student pilot
logbook, which allows the student pilot to take the written
and practical tests for pilot certification.
Knowledge and Skill Tests
Knowledge Tests
The knowledge test is the computer portion of the tests taken
to obtain pilot certification. The test contains questions of
the objective, multiple-choice type. This testing method
conserves the applicant's time, eliminates any element of
individual judgment in determining grades, and saves time
in scoring.
FAA Airman Knowledge Test Guides for every type of pilot
certificate address most questions you may have regarding
the knowledge test process. The guides are available on-
line (free of charge) at http://www.faa.gov/training_testing/
testing/test_guides/.

Figure 1-25. Examples of Practical Test Standards.
FAA-S-8081-12C
FAA-S-8081-14B
FAA-S-8081-8B
When To Take the Knowledge Test
The knowledge test is more meaningful to the applicant
and more likely to result in a satisfactory grade if it is taken
after beginning the flight portion of the training. Therefore,
the FAA recommends the knowledge test be taken after the
student pilot has completed a solo cross-country flight. The
operational knowledge gained by this experience can be used
to the student’s advantage in the knowledge test. The student
pilot’s CFI is the best person to determine when the applicant
is ready to take the knowledge test.
Practical Test
The FAA has developed PTS for FAA pilot certificates
and associated ratings. [Figure 1-25] In 2015, the FAA
began transitioning to the ACS approach. The ACS is
essentially an “enhanced” version of the PTS. It adds task-
specific knowledge and risk management elements to each
PTS Area of Operation and Task. The result is a holistic,
integrated presentation of specific knowledge, skills, and
risk management elements and performance metrics for each
Area of Operation and Task The ACS evaluation program
will eventually replace the PTS program for evaluating and
certifying pilots.
The practical tests are administered by FAA ASIs and DPEs.
Title 14 CFR part 61 specifies the areas of operation in which
knowledge and skill must be demonstrated by the applicant.
Since the FAA requires all practical tests be conducted in
accordance with the appropriate PTS and the policies set forth
in the Introduction section of the PTS book. The pilot applicant
should become familiar with this book during training.
The PTS book is a testing document and not intended to be
a training syllabus. An appropriately-rated flight instructor
is responsible for training the pilot applicant to acceptable
standards in all subject matter areas, procedures, and
maneuvers. Descriptions of tasks and information on how to
perform maneuvers and procedures are contained in reference
and teaching documents such as this handbook. A list of
reference documents is contained in the Introduction section
of each PTS book. Copies may obtained by:
Downloading from the FAA website at www.faa.gov
Purchasing print copies from the GPO, Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania, or via their official online bookstore
at www.access.gpo.gov
The flight proficiency maneuvers listed in 14 CFR part 61
are the standard skill requirements for certification. They
are outlined in the PTS as “areas of operation.” These are
phases of the practical test arranged in a logical sequence
within the standard. They begin with preflight preparation
and end with postflight procedures. Each area of operation