Chapter 9
Flight Manuals and
Other Documents
Introduction
Each aircraft comes with documentation and a set of manuals
with which a pilot must be familiar in order to fly that aircraft.
This chapter covers airplane flight manuals (AFM), the
pilot’s operating handbook (POH), and aircraft documents
pertaining to ownership, airworthiness, maintenance, and
operations with inoperative equipment. Knowledge of these
required documents and manuals is essential for a pilot to
conduct a safe flight.
Airplane Flight Manuals (AFM)
Flight manuals and operating handbooks are concise reference
books that provide specific information about a particular
aircraft or subject. They contain basic facts, information,
and/or instructions for the pilot about the operation of an
aircraft, flying techniques, etc., and are intended to be kept
on hand for ready reference.
9-1

The aircraft owner/information manual is a document
developed by the aircraft manufacturer and contains general
information about the make and model of the aircraft.
The manual is not approved by the Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA) and is not specific to an individual
aircraft. The manual provides general information about the
operation of an aircraft, is not kept current, and cannot be
substituted for the AFM/POH.
An AFM is a document developed by the aircraft manufacturer
and approved by the FAA. This book contains the information
and instructions required to operate an aircraft safely. A
pilot must comply with this information which is specific
to a particular make and model of aircraft, usually by serial
number. An AFM contains the operating procedures and
limitations of that aircraft. Title 14 of the Code of Federal
Regulations (14 CFR) part 91 requires that pilots comply
with the operating limitations specified in the approved flight
manuals, markings, and placards.
Originally, flight manuals followed whatever format and
content the manufacturer felt was appropriate, but this
changed with the acceptance of Specification No. 1 prepared
by the General Aviation Manufacturers Association (GAMA).
Specification No. 1 established a standardized format for all
general aviation airplane and helicopter flight manuals.
The POH is a document developed by the aircraft
manufacturer and contains FAA-approved AFM information.
If “POH” is used in the main title, a statement must be
included on the title page indicating that sections of the
document are FAA approved as the AFM.
The POH for most light aircraft built after 1975 is also
designated as the FAA-approved flight manual. The typical
AFM/POH contains the following nine sections: General;
Limitations; Emergency Procedures; Normal Procedures;
Performance; Weight and Balance/Equipment List; Systems
Description; Handling, Service, and Maintenance; and
Supplements. Manufacturers also have the option of including
additional sections, such as one on Safety and Operational
Tips or an alphabetical index at the end of the POH.
Preliminary Pages
While the AFM/POH may appear similar for the same make
and model of aircraft, each manual is unique and contains
specific information about a particular aircraft, such as the
equipment installed and weight and balance information.
Manufacturers are required to include the serial number and
registration on the title page to identify the aircraft to which
the manual belongs. If a manual does not indicate a specific
aircraft registration and serial number, it is limited to general
study purposes only.
9-2
Most manufacturers include a table of contents that identifies
the order of the entire manual by section number and title.
Usually, each section also contains a table of contents for that
section. Page numbers reflect the section and page within that
section (1-1, 1-2, 2-1, 3-1, etc.). If the manual is published
in loose-leaf form, each section is usually marked with a
divider tab indicating the section number, title, or both. The
Emergency Procedures section may have a red tab for quick
identification and reference.
General (Section 1)
The General section provides the basic descriptive
information on the airframe and powerplant(s). Some
manuals include a three-dimensional drawing of the aircraft
that provides dimensions of various components. Included
are such items as wingspan, maximum height, overall length,
wheelbase length, main landing gear track width, diameter
of the rotor system, maximum propeller diameter, propeller
ground clearance, minimum turning radius, and wing area.
This section serves as a quick reference and helps a pilot
become familiar with the aircraft.
The last segment of the General section contains definitions,
abbreviations, explanations of symbology, and some of
the terminology used in the POH. At the discretion of the
manufacturer, metric and other conversion tables may also
be included.
Limitations (Section 2)
The Limitations section contains only those limitations required
by regulation or that are necessary for the safe operation of
the aircraft, powerplant, systems, and equipment. It includes
operating limitations, instrument markings, color-coding,
and basic placards. Some of the limitation areas are airspeed,
powerplant, weight and loading distribution, and flight.
Airspeed
Airspeed limitations are shown on the airspeed indicator
(ASI) by color coding and on placards or graphs in the
aircraft. [Figure 9-1] A red line on the ASI shows the airspeed
limit beyond which structural damage could occur. This is
called the never-exceed speed (VNE). A yellow arc indicates
the speed range between maximum structural cruising speed
(VN0) and VNE. Operation of an aircraft in the yellow airspeed
arc is for smooth air only and then only with caution. A green
arc depicts the normal operating speed range, with the upper
end at VN0 and the lower end at stalling speed at maximum
weight with the landing gear and flaps retracted (VS1). For
airplanes, the flap operating range is depicted by the white
arc, with the upper end at the maximum flap extended speed
(VFE), and the lower end at the stalling speed with the landing
gear and flaps in the landing configuration (VS0).

Figure 9-1. Single-engine airspeed indicator.
In addition to the markings listed above, small multi-engine
airplanes have a red radial line to indicate single-engine
minimum controllable airspeed (VMC). A blue radial line
is used to indicate single-engine best rate of climb speed at
maximum weight at sea level (VYSE). [Figure 9-2]
Powerplant
The Powerplant Limitations portion describes operating
limitations on an aircraft’s reciprocating or turbine engine(s).
These include limitations for takeoff power, maximum
continuous power, and maximum normal operating power,
which is the maximum power the engine can produce without
any restrictions and is depicted by a green arc. Other items
that can be included in this area are the minimum and
maximum oil and fuel pressures, oil and fuel grades, and
propeller operating limits. [Figure 9-3]
All reciprocating-engine powered aircraft must have a
revolutions per minute (rpm) indicator for each engine.
Aircraft equipped with a constant-speed propeller or rotor
system use a manifold pressure gauge to monitor power
output and a tachometer to monitor propeller or rotor speed.
Both instruments depict the maximum operating limit with
IAS
AIRSPEED
KNOTS
TAS
Figure 9-2. Multi-engine airspeed indicator.
Maximum
II5
I00
P
T
P
R
E
°F
S
E
I50
I
M
Normal operating range
S
I00
P
S
OIL
Minimum
Figure 9-3. Minimum, maximum, and normal operating range
markings on oil gauge.
a red radial line and the normal operating range with a green
arc. [Figure 9-4] Some instruments may have a yellow arc
to indicate a caution area.
Weight and Loading Distribution
Weight and Loading Distribution contains the maximum
certificated weights, as well as the center of gravity (CG)
range. The location of the reference datum used in balance
computations is included in this section. Weight and balance
computations are not provided in this area, but rather in the
weight and balance section of the AFM/POH.
MANIFOLD
PRESSURE
IN Hg
ALg.
I5
I5
I0
I0
RPM
HUNDREDS
I
I0
HOURS
AVOID
CONTINUOUS
OPERATION
BETWEEN 2250
AND 2350 RPM
Figure 9-4. Manifold pressure gauge (top) and tachometer (bottom).
9-3

Flight Limits
Flight Limits list authorized maneuvers with appropriate
entry speeds, flight load factor limits, and types of operation
limits. It also indicates those maneuvers that are prohibited,
such as spins or acrobatic flight, as well as operational
limitations such as flight into known icing conditions.
Placards
Most aircraft display one or more placards that contain
information having a direct bearing on the safe operation of
the aircraft. These placards are located in conspicuous places
and are reproduced in the Limitations section or as directed by
an Airworthiness Directive (AD). [Figure 9-5] Airworthiness
Directives are explained in detail later in this chapter.
Emergency Procedures (Section 3)
Checklists describing the recommended procedures and
airspeeds for coping with various types of emergencies or
critical situations are located in the Emergency Procedures
section. Some of the emergencies covered include:
engine failure, fire, and system failure. The procedures
for inflight engine restarting and ditching may also be
included. Manufacturers may first show an emergency
checklist in an abbreviated form with the order of items
reflecting the sequence of action. Amplified checklists that
provide additional information on the procedures follow
the abbreviated checklist. To be prepared for emergency
situations, memorize the immediate action items and, after
completion, refer to the appropriate checklist.
Figure 9-5. Placards are used to depict aircraft limitations.
9-4
Manufacturers may include an optional subsection
entitled Abnormal Procedures. This subsection describes
recommended procedures for handling malfunctions that are
not considered emergencies.
Normal Procedures (Section 4)
This section begins with a list of the airspeeds for normal
operations. The next area consists of several checklists that
may include preflight inspection, before starting procedures,
starting engine, before taxiing, taxiing, before takeoff, climb,
cruise, descent, before landing, balked landing, after landing,
and post flight procedures. An Amplified Procedures area
follows the checklists to provide more detailed information
about the various previously mentioned procedures.
To avoid missing important steps, always use the appropriate
checklists when available. Consistent adherence to approved
checklists is a sign of a disciplined and competent pilot.
Performance (Section 5)
The Performance section contains all the information required
by the aircraft certification regulations and any additional
performance information the manufacturer deems important
to pilot ability to safely operate the aircraft. Performance
charts, tables, and graphs vary in style, but all contain the
same basic information. Examples of the performance
information found in most flight manuals include a graph or
table for converting calibrated airspeed to true airspeed; stall
speeds in various configurations; and data for determining
takeoff and climb performance, cruise performance, and
landing performance. Figure 9-6 is an example of a typical
performance graph. For more information on use of the
charts, graphs, and tables, refer to Chapter 10, Aircraft
Performance.
Weight and Balance/Equipment List (Section 6)
The Weight and Balance/Equipment List section contains
all the information required by the FAA to calculate the
weight and balance of an aircraft. Manufacturers include
sample weight and balance problems. Weight and balance is
discussed in greater detail in Chapter 10, Weight and Balance.
Systems Description (Section 7)
This section describes the aircraft systems in a manner
appropriate to the pilot most likely to operate the aircraft.
For example, a manufacturer might assume an experienced
pilot will be reading the information for an advanced aircraft.
For more information on aircraft systems, refer to Chapter
7, Aircraft Systems.

Calibrated stall speed
EXAMPLE
Gross weight: 2,170 pounds
Angle of bank: 20°
Indicated stall speed
Flap position: 40°
Stall speed, indicated: 44 knots
Maximum weight - 2,440 (pounds)
Stall speed (knots)
0° Flaps
0° Flaps
40° Flaps
40° Flaps
0°
20°
40°
60°
2,400
2,200
2,000
1,800
1,600
Gross weight (pounds)
Angle of bank (degrees)
Figure 9-6. Stall speed chart.
Handling, Service, and Maintenance (Section 8)
The Handling, Service, and Maintenance section describes
the maintenance and inspections recommended by the
manufacturer (and the regulations). Additional maintenance
or inspections may be required by the issuance of ADs
applicable to the airframe, engine, propeller, or components.
This section also describes preventive maintenance that
may be accomplished by certificated pilots, as well as the
manufacturer’s recommended ground handling procedures. It
includes considerations for hangaring, tie-down, and general
storage procedures for the aircraft.
Supplements (Section 9)
The Supplements section contains information necessary
to safely and efficiently operate the aircraft when equipped
with optional systems and equipment (not provided with the
Figure 9-7. Supplements provide information on optional equipment.
standard aircraft). Some of this information may be supplied
by the aircraft manufacturer or by the manufacturer of the
optional equipment. The appropriate information is inserted
into the flight manual at the time the equipment is installed.
Autopilots, navigation systems, and air-conditioning
systems are examples of equipment described in this section.
[Figure 9-7]
9-5

Safety Tips (Section 10)
The Safety Tips section is an optional section containing a
review of information that enhances the safe operation of the
aircraft. For example, physiological factors, general weather
information, fuel conservation procedures, high altitude
operations, or cold weather operations might be discussed.
Aircraft Documents
Certificate of Aircraft Registration
Before an aircraft can be flown legally, it must be registered
with the FAA Aircraft Registry. The Certificate of Aircraft
Registration, which is issued to the owner as evidence of
the registration, must be carried in the aircraft at all times.
[Figure 9-8]
The Certificate of Aircraft Registration cannot be used for
operations when:
•
The aircraft is registered under the laws of a foreign
country
Figure 9-8. AC Form 8050-3, Certificate of Aircraft Registration.
9-6
•
The aircraft’s registration is canceled upon written
request of the certificate holder
•
The aircraft is totally destroyed or scrapped
•
The ownership of the aircraft is transferred
•
The certificate holder loses United States citizenship
For additional information, see 14 CFR part 47, section 47.41.
When one of the events listed in 14 CFR part 47, section
47.41 occurs, the previous owner must notify the FAA by
filling in the back of the Certificate of Aircraft Registration,
and mailing it to:
FAA Aircraft Registration Branch, AFS-750
P.O. Box 25504
Oklahoma City, OK 73125-0504
A dealer’s aircraft registration certificate is another form of
registration certificate, but is valid only for required flight
tests by the manufacturer or in flights that are necessary for

the sale of the aircraft by the manufacturer or a dealer. The
A Standard Airworthiness Certificate is issued for aircraft
dealer must remove the certificate when the aircraft is sold.
type certificated in the normal, utility, acrobatic, commuter,
transport categories, and manned free balloons. Figure 9-9
Upon complying with 14 CFR part 47, section 47.31, the
illustrates a Standard Airworthiness Certificate, and an
pink copy of the application for an Aircraft Registration
explanation of each item in the certificate follows.
Application, Aeronautical Center (AC) Form 8050-1,
1. Nationality and Registration Marks. The “N”
provides authorization to operate an unregistered aircraft
indicates the aircraft is registered in the United States.
for a period not to exceed 90 days. Since the aircraft is
Registration marks consist of a series of up to five
unregistered, it cannot be operated outside of the United
numbers or numbers and letters. In this case, N2631A
States until a permanent Certificate of Aircraft Registration
is the registration number assigned to this aircraft.
is received and placed in the aircraft.
2.
Manufacturer and Model. Indicates the manufacturer,
make, and model of the aircraft.
The FAA does not issue any certificate of ownership or
endorse any information with respect to ownership on a
3.
Aircraft Serial Number. Indicates the manufacturer’s
Certificate of Aircraft Registration.
serial number assigned to the aircraft, as noted on the
aircraft data plate.
NOTE: For additional information concerning the Aircraft
4.
Category. Indicates the category in which the aircraft
Registration Application or the Aircraft Bill of Sale, contact
must be operated. In this case, it must be operated
the nearest FAA Flight Standards District Office (FSDO).
in accordance with the limitations specified for the
“NORMAL” category.
Airworthiness Certificate
5.
Authority and Basis for Issuance. Indicates the aircraft
An Airworthiness Certificate is issued by a representative of
conforms to its type certificate and is considered in
the FAA after the aircraft has been inspected, is found to meet
condition for safe operation at the time of inspection
the requirements of 14 CFR part 21, and is in condition for safe
and issuance of the certificate. Any exemptions from
operation. The Airworthiness Certificate must be displayed in
the applicable airworthiness standards are briefly
the aircraft so it is legible to the passengers and crew whenever
noted here and the exemption number given. The word
it is operated. The Airworthiness Certificate must remain with
“NONE” is entered if no exemption exists.
the aircraft unless it is sold to a foreign purchaser.
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION-FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION
STANDARD AIRWORTHINESS CERTIFICATE
1 NATIONALITY AND
2 MANUFACTURER AND MODEL
3 AIRCRAFT SERIAL
4 CATEGORY
REGISTRATION MARKS
NUMBER
N12345
Douglas DC-6A
Transport
5 AUTHORITY AND BASIS FOR ISSUANCE
This airworthiness certificate is issued pursuant to the Federal Aviation Act of 1958 and certifies that, as of the date of issuance, the
aircraft to which issued has been inspected and found to conform to the type certificate therefor, to be in condition for safe operation,
and has been shown to meet the requirements of the applicable comprehensive and detailed airworthiness code as provided by Annex 8
to the Convention on International Civil Aviation, except as noted herein.
Exceptions:
None
6 TERMS AND CONDITIONS
Unless sooner surrendered, suspended, revoked, or a termination date is otherwise established by the Administrator, this airworthiness
certificate is effective as long as the maintenance, preventative maintenance, and alterations are performed in accordance with
Parts 21, 43, and 91 of the Federal Aviation Regulations, as appropriate, and the aircraft is registered in the United States.
DATE OF ISSUANCE
FAA REPRESENTATIVE
DESIGNATION NUMBER
01/20/00
NE-XX
E.R. White E.R. White
Any iteration, reproduction, or misuse of this certificate may be punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000 or imprisonment not exceeding 3 years or both.
THIS CERTIFICATE MUST BE DISPLAYED IN THE AIRCRAFT IN ACCORDANCE WITH APPLICABLE FEDERAL AVIATION REGULATIONS.
FAA Form 8100-2 (04-11) Supersedes Previous Edition
Figure 9-9. FAA Form 8100-2, Standard Airworthiness Certificate.
9-7

6.
Terms and Conditions. Indicates the Airworthiness
Certificate is in effect indefinitely if the aircraft is
maintained in accordance with 14 CFR parts 21, 43, and
91, and the aircraft is registered in the United States.
Also included are the date the certificate was issued and the
signature and office identification of the FAA representative.
A Standard Airworthiness Certificate remains in effect
if the aircraft receives the required maintenance and is
properly registered in the United States. Flight safety relies
in part on the condition of the aircraft, which is determined
by inspections performed by mechanics, approved repair
stations, or manufacturers that meet specific requirements
of 14 CFR part 43.
A Special Airworthiness Certificate is issued for all aircraft
certificated in other than the Standard classifications, such
as Experimental, Restricted, Limited, Provisional, and
Light-Sport Aircraft (LSA). LSA receive a pink special
airworthiness certificate; however, there are exceptions.
For example, the Piper Cub is in the LSA category, but it
was certificated as a normal aircraft during its manufacture.
When purchasing an aircraft classified as other than Standard,
it is recommended that the local FSDO be contacted for an
explanation of the pertinent airworthiness requirements and
the limitations of such a certificate.
Aircraft Maintenance
Maintenance is defined as the preservation, inspection,
overhaul, and repair of an aircraft, including the replacement
of parts. Regular and proper maintenance ensures that
an aircraft meets an acceptable standard of airworthiness
throughout its operational life.
Although maintenance requirements vary for different
types of aircraft, experience shows that aircraft need some
type of preventive maintenance every 25 hours of flying
time or less and minor maintenance at least every 100
hours. This is influenced by the kind of operation, climatic
conditions, storage facilities, age, and construction of the
aircraft. Manufacturers supply maintenance manuals, parts
catalogs, and other service information that should be used
in maintaining the aircraft.
Aircraft Inspections
Under 14 CFR part 91, the primary responsibility for
maintaining an aircraft in an airworthy condition falls on the
owner or operator of the aircraft. Certain inspections must be
performed on the aircraft, and the owner must maintain the
airworthiness of the aircraft during the time between required
inspections by having any defects corrected.
9-8
Under 14 CFR, part 91, subpart E, all civil aircraft are
required to be inspected at specific intervals to determine
the overall condition. The interval depends upon the type
of operations in which the aircraft is engaged. All aircraft
need to be inspected at least once every 12 calendar months,
while inspection is required for others after every 100 hours
of operation. Some aircraft are inspected in accordance with
an inspection system set up to provide for total inspection
of the aircraft on the basis of calendar time, time in service,
number of system operations, or any combination of these.
All inspections should follow the current manufacturer’s
maintenance manual, including the Instructions for
Continued Airworthiness concerning inspection intervals,
parts replacement, and life-limited items as applicable to
the aircraft.
Annual Inspection
Any reciprocating engine or single-engine turbojet/
turbopropeller-powered small aircraft (weighing 12,500
pounds or less) flown for business or pleasure and not
flown for compensation or hire is required to be inspected
at least annually. The inspection shall be performed by a
certificated airframe and powerplant (A&P) mechanic who
holds an inspection authorization (IA) by the manufacturer
of the aircraft or by a certificated and appropriately rated
repair station. The aircraft may not be operated unless the
annual inspection has been performed within the preceding
12 calendar months. A period of 12 calendar months extends
from any day of a month to the last day of the same month the
following year. An aircraft overdue for an annual inspection
may be operated under a Special Flight Permit issued by
the FAA for the purpose of flying the aircraft to a location
where the annual inspection can be performed. However, all
applicable ADs that are due must be complied with before
the flight.
100-Hour Inspection
All aircraft under 12,500 pounds (except turbojet/
turbopropeller-powered multi-engine airplanes and turbine
powered rotorcraft), used to carry passengers for hire, must
receive a 100-hour inspection within the preceding 100 hours
of time in service and must be approved for return to service.
Additionally, an aircraft used for flight instruction for hire,
when provided by the person giving the flight instruction,
must also have received a 100-hour inspection. This inspection
must be performed by an FAA-certificated A&P mechanic,
an appropriately rated FAA-certificated repair station, or
by the aircraft manufacturer. An annual inspection, or an
inspection for the issuance of an Airworthiness Certificate,
may be substituted for a required 100-hour inspection. The
100-hour limitation may be exceeded by no more than 10