Chapter 8: Aeronautical Decision-Making in
Chapter8: Acronautical Decision-Making in
Flight
Flight
Introduction
This chapter focuses on the pilot aeronautical decision-making (ADM) skills used to mitigate risk factors while in flight.
Advisory Circular (AC) 60-22, Aeronautical Decision-Making [Figure 8-1], provides additional information, background
references, definitions, and other pertinent information about ADM training in the general aviation environment and is available
here.
Circular
AC 60-22
32/3/91
Ce on
stew ccoination and eommurieadon, snd other
Report Number
Tide
"ADM techniques, the reader i directed to one ct
‘nore of the manuals waich may he ohisined
—OTYFAA/PM.8G/46Aeronnetical
Decision
‘rom National Technical Tnfrmation Serves,
Making
~
Cockpit
escuree Management
&
Published Documens.
(Price
ct
NTIS
identificatien
dividual
documents
is
suhct
to
change
umber
ADAZ05I15,
‘tout noice)
rice $23.00,
.
Bepor Number
Tide
b.
Any of the series of ADM unig
‘manwals aay De oblained by writing or calling:
DOTEAMPM-£6i61
Acroncutieal
Decision
Making for Student nd
‘Malling Addeess:.
National Teeliical
Private Pilots.
NTIS
Information Service
acon 22
sist
‘igentfieon
number
S285 Pot Royal Read
ADAIR25§9,
price
Springfield, Virginia 22161
i evn he eae rage of poster
te per ep en
$23.00.
2.
4. CONVENTIONAL DECISION MAKING. inn
‘Telephone:
(103) 487 4550 (oxders)
veedforaves hagee by mepgusii fetes
decison mating, te onset he deed Sang e Seerains
Making for Commercial
(rash orders only)
Someng has changed an expect cage id
une of en
DOTFAAPM-8642
Aeronautics!
Decision
(00) 386-4700
Im conventional
tox ove Recopaion
(903) 478-4780 (ie idenieaion
{hangin he stuaon & 2 val hep iaay how ls facta capes Somnoo esse
of anger of mon,
bFlare
2 lasraes the ADM process,
Pinte.
NTIS
branch)
Seetlon mating pct, Notnodcing We ange ang ahd shoys be inerocon of Ue ADM
Wenliication
amber
ine sao cm ead diucly 2 miop soe Sl tow Bese mop car er ie
ADA198772,
price, DEFINITIONS,
Gigure the Gage nds Ost sn spre. Subse Ser wineneselioeet
51700,
fete response of aclon i essary inode oan flowing wih an sexes of ieanes
cases,
DOT/PAAPMER6G3
8, ADM isa systematic approach
the
Aeronanieal
Decision
mental
process
used.
by
aireall
pilots
Foye soon (or at les ane of eee aedonos ootaes made
ees
‘Making
for instrument
cenistenlly determine the best eourse of action
‘Ren that compte 1)an bing Soot a Cesied ue mamtoned, ADM echnces
few station, Teor, suaianal sarees s decides malig process whan sven of
ie sooremsod
Pilots.
NTIS
inmsponse ta given set of
circumstances,
ie detoonmalng, At
inparanes
oes
deste ees
identification
ourmber
18724880, price $17.00.
D Atiwude is a persona’
motivational
tokeytomniehland
‘teispositon to respond in persons, siuations,
DOTIFAAPMES6M4
Acronautcal
Decision
ar_evonts
ina
given
manner
thal
can,
Makiag
for Tnsincror——neyereless, be changed or modified dhrough
Picts (now to wach
caining, sort of mental shortcut to decision
coeasacs
ADM).
NTIS
making
identification
mamber
$17.00,
the ails 9
ADAI82611,
price
€.
Anticude Managements
reegnize hazanlous aidesin onesel the
vaillingness 10 mocify them a8 nesessary through
[srTUATION]
APS-500 (Advisory Circuler Staff)
DOTFAAPM8545
Acronauteal
Decision
rhe
application
of
an
approprinte
Making fur Welicper —antigcle wrought,
Pilots.
NTIS
Hemiicction
number
Cookpit Resource
Management,
ADAI80325,
prise
(CRM, in mulkipsison oxew vonfguraiors,
is
$030,
the effective use of alpersonnel and materiel
Ez]
a
Par
¢
|
eS == Ete]
‘roffas C. Accardi
FIGURE 2. AERONAUTICAL DECISION MAKING PROCESS
cup
Figure 8-1. Advisory Circular (AC) 60-22, Aeronautical Decision-Making, includes a wealth of information for pilots.
Accidents still occur despite advances in training methods, aircraft technology, and services available to pilots. Despite
improvements in training and technology, human error remains an issue. ADM provides a foundation, which should help pilots
avoid making errors in judgment.
Aeronautical decision-making (ADM) provides pilots with a structured framework of processes and procedures, which have a
positive effect on managing hazards. ADM does not eliminate hazards, but helps the pilot address hazards and associated risks
that threaten the safety of flight. ADM describes the ongoing process used by pilots to determine the best course of action when
facing a given set of circumstances.
ADM Background
Before the development of ADM training, consensus held that good judgment resulted from experience gained during hours
of accident-free flying. However, research done during the 1980s indicated that including ADM in training significantly
reduced judgment errors among student pilots. In addition, an operator flying about 400,000 hours annually demonstrated a 54
percent reduction in the accident rate after adding ADM to recurrent training. Since ADM enhances safety, the Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA) requires ADM training and testing.
Analytical Decision-Making
Several closed-loop models describe steps pilots should take when making decisions. For example, AC 60-22 contains
information on the DECIDE Model, which pilots may wish to study and consider using. The following discussion describes
the simpler 3P model, which stands for Perceive, Process, and Perform. [Figure 8-2] Using this model in flight continues the
8-1

risk management activity taken before flight, and allows the pilot to address additional hazards while dealing with a higher
workload.
©
(Perceive)
Aeronautical
Decision-
Making
(Process)
(Perform)
=
Figure 8-2. The illustration shows how the 3P model is used in decision-making.
Perceive: While en route, for example, a pilot checks data-link weather on an electronic flight bag and sees thunderstorms
developing ahead. The pilot perceives this as a significant hazard since the likelihood of a thunderstorm affecting the aircraft
could be high and the consequences could be severe.
Process: The pilot considers the options available to mitigate the threat. Choices may include:
• Diverting to a nearby airport
• Turning back, if conditions allow
• Rerouting the flight to avoid the thunderstorms
• Flying above the weather.
During analytical decision-making, the pilot evaluates the pros and cons associated with each option and chooses one that
should adequately reduce the level of risk. For example, the aircraft may not have the equipment or capability to fly above the
weather or there might not be enough fuel on board for a significant reroute. In that case, the pilot excludes those two options.
What the pilot decides depends on the available choices, training, experience, conditions, equipment, and pilot ability.
Analytical decision-making leads to an option likely to result in a safe outcome. Pilots should consider the following items less
important than safety:
1. Being on time
2. Inconveniencing passengers
3. Inconveniencing persons waiting at the destination
4. Continuing to the original destination
Perform: After choosing a viable option, the pilot executes the changes. The choice made should lead to a safe outcome.
8-2

Effective risk management models utilize a closed-loop process. The closed-loop nature of the 3P model requires a periodic
check to verify successful mitigation of the risk. If the pilot perceives insufficient mitigation of that risk or detects a new hazard,
the process and analysis resumes.
Naturalistic Decision-Making
Experienced pilots use naturalistic decision-making when the time available precludes a more formal analytical process. In this
type of scenario, pilots first assess whether the given situation strikes them as familiar. Rather than analyze the pros and cons
of different actions, a pilot might start with a course of action that seems workable based on previously encountered patterns.
In this type of decision-making, pilots may recall previous events and choose a course of action based on expectations. In the
following scenario, a pilot’s familiarity with a previous incident led to a successful naturalistic decision.
A turkey vulture impacted the front fan of a jet engine shortly after takeoff and destroyed the engine. Several titanium fan blades
departed the aircraft and the cabin filled with smoke. The crew landed safely after donning masks and goggles. The impact was
forceful enough to leave an impression of the feathers on some of the remaining blades. [Figure 8-3]
Z
¢ £22
ke
i
Wes
oe
Y
as
:
€
ES
eee
a
Figure 8-3. Sheared off titanium fan blade with feather impressions.
Years later, a pilot who investigated this bird strike was flying a turbojet. When a large bird appeared in the departure path, the
pilot delayed rotation a few seconds, and the airplane flew under the bird without incident. Visualizing what could happen,
knowing that there were no obstacles ahead, sensing that a short delay would not exceed any limitations, and remembering that
instructors mentioned that pilots might delay rotation if conditions warrant, the pilot made a split-second decision to extend the
takeoff roll beyond rotation speed.
In summary, naturalistic decision-making improves with training and experience, and it is not a replacement for memory items
or a checklist procedure. Pilots typically use naturalistic decision-making when a situation requires immediate action and is not
covered by an existing procedure.
Single-Pilot Resource Management
Single-pilot resource management (SRM) specifically refers to appropriate management of all resources available to the single
pilot. SRM includes competencies such as situational awareness, communication skills, teamwork, task allocation, aeronautical
decision-making, risk management, controlled flight into terrain (CFIT) awareness, and automation management. Resources
are found both inside and outside the aircraft. Many of the concepts are similar to crew resource management (CRM).
Learning to recognize these resources is an essential part of SRM. In addition, a pilot should evaluate whether there is time to
use a particular resource. For example, ATC assistance may be very useful if a pilot becomes lost, but there may be no time to
contact ATC in an emergency. During an emergency, a pilot needs to prioritize tasks and manage workload.
Many older aircraft may have modern equipment installed, which require a flight manual supplement. This equipment can be a
valuable single-pilot resource if the pilot uses the equipment proficiently and adjusts procedures appropriately. In some cases,
8-3

the procedures for new equipment affect the aircraft checklists. A short video on modern installations and checklist management
is available here.
In a single-pilot operation, pilots often gather, organize, and manage available resources before flight to make it easier to
assess and manage risks and make informed aeronautical decisions. The comprehensive planning and preparation activities
described earlier in chapters 3, 4, and 5 facilitate SRM. If the pilot prepares for scenarios that may occur during a flight, such
as a diversion or precautionary landing, it becomes easier to consider and perform that option with the needed information
at hand. For example, while en route to an airport the aircraft alternator fails. After completing the appropriate checklist, the
alternator remains off line, and the battery will only provide electricity for a short time. The pilot decides to divert to the nearest
suitable airport. Does the pilot know the destinations along the route of flight that qualify? Did the pilot organize personal and
flight deck resources to access information such as communication frequencies and navigation aids for the available airports?
By considering and organizing information before flight, the single pilot may perform such tasks with crew-like efficiency.
Chapter Summary
Aeronautical decision-making occurs during all aspects of flight and begins during flight planning. When in flight, however,
pilots learn to deal with any threat using appropriate analytical thinking. The analytical process prevails unless time pressure
and lack of an existing procedure calls for naturalistic decision-making. The 3P model illustrates a closed-loop process that
pilots use to reinforce appropriate decision-making. Several models address ADM, and pilots should study and use the model
they find effective.
8-4