Introduction
The en route phase of flight is defined as that segment of
flight from the termination point of a departure procedure
to the origination point of an arrival procedure. The
procedures employed in the en route phase of flight are
governed by a set of specific flight standards established
by 14 CFR [Figure 2-1], FAA Order 8260.3, and related
publications. These standards establish courses to be flown,
obstacle clearance criteria, minimum altitudes, navigation
performance, and communications requirements.
En Route Operations

Figure 2-1. Code of Federal Regulations, Title 14 Aeronautics and Space.
En Route Navigation
En route instrument flight rules (IFR) navigation is evolving
from the ground-based navigational aid (NAVAID) airway
system to a sophisticated satellite and computer-based
system that can generate courses to suit the operational
requirements of almost any flight. The FAA Global
Navigation Satellite System (GNSS) provides satellite-based
positioning, navigation, and timing services in the United
States to enable performance-based operations for all
phases of flight, to include en route navigation.
14 CFR Part 91, § 91.181, is the basis for the course to be
flown. Unless authorized by ATC, to operate an aircraft
within controlled airspace under IFR, pilots must either
fly along the centerline when on a Federal airway or,
on routes other than Federal airways, along the direct
course between NAVAIDs or fixes defining the route. The
regulation allows maneuvering to pass well clear of other
air traffic or, if in visual meteorogical conditions (VMC),
to clear the flightpath both before and during climb or
descent.
Airways
Airway routing occurs along pre-defined pathways called
airways. [Figure 2-2] Airways can be thought of as three-
dimensional highways for aircraft. In most land areas of
the world, aircraft are required to fly airways between the
departure and destination airports. The rules governing
airway routing, Standard Instrument Departures (SID)
and Standard Terminal Arrival (STAR), are published flight
procedures that cover altitude, airspeed, and requirements
for entering and leaving the airway. Most airways are
eight nautical miles (14 kilometers) wide, and the airway
flight levels keep aircraft separated by at least 500 vertical
feet from aircraft on the flight level above and below
when operating under VFR. When operating under IFR,
between the surface and an altitude of Flight Level (FL)
290, no aircraft should come closer vertically than 1,000
feet. Above FL 290, no aircraft should come closer than
2,000 feet except in airspace where Reduced Vertical
Separation Minima (RVSM) can be applied in which case
the vertical separation is reduced to 1,000 feet. Airways
usually intersect at NAVAIDs that designate the allowed
points for changing from one airway to another. Airways
have names consisting of one or more letters followed by
one or more digits (e.g., V484 or UA419).
The en route airspace structure of the National Airspace
System (NAS) consists of three strata. The first stratum low
Figure 2-2. Airways depicted on an aeronautical chart.

altitude airways in the United States can be navigated
using NAVAIDs, have names that start with the letter V, and
are called Victor Airways. [Figure 2-3] They cover altitudes
from approximately 1,200 feet above ground level (AGL)
up to, but not including 18,000 feet above mean sea level
(MSL). The second stratum high altitude airways in the
United States all have names that start with the letter J,
and are called Jet Routes. [Figure 2-4] These routes run
from 18,000 feet to 45,000 feet. The third stratum allows
random operations above flight level (FL) 450. The altitude
separating the low and high airway structure varies from
county to country. For example, in Switzerland it is 19,500
feet and 25,000 feet in Egypt.
Air Route Traffic Control Centers
The FAA defines an Air Route Traffic Control Center (ARTCC)
as a facility established to provide air traffic control (ATC)
service to aircraft operating on IFR flight plans within
controlled airspace, principally during the en route phase
of flight. When equipment capabilities and controller
workload permit, certain advisory/assistance services may
be provided to VFR aircraft.
ARTCCs, usually referred to as Centers, are established
primarily to provide air traffic service to aircraft operating
on IFR flight plans within the controlled airspace, and
principally during the en route phase of flight. There are
Figure 2-3. Victor airways.
Figure 2-4. Jet routes.
ZID
ZMP
ZOB
ZBW
ZNY
ZNY
ZDC
ZAU
ZKC
ZME
ZTL
ZJX
ZMA
ZHU
ZFW
ZAB
ZDV
ZLA
ZOA
ZLC
ZSE
ZHN
ZAN
Cleveland Center
Albuquerque Center
Seattle Center
Atlanta Center
Chicago Center
Boston Center
Washington
Center (DC)
Denver Center
Fort Worth Center
Houston Center
Indianapolis
Center
Jacksonville Center
Kansas City Center
Los Angeles Center
Salt Lake City Center
Miami Center
Memphis Center
Minneapolis Center
New York
Center
Oakland Center
Honolulu
Center
Anchorage
Center
Figure 2-5. Air Route Traffic Control Centers.

21 ARTCC’s in the United States. [Figure 2-5] Any aircraft
operating under IFR within the confines of an ARTCC’s
airspace is controlled by air traffic controllers at the Center.
This includes all sorts of different types of aircraft: privately
owned single engine aircraft, commuter airlines, military
jets, and commercial airlines.
The largest component of the NAS is the ARTCC. Each
ARTCC covers thousands of square miles encompassing
all or part of several states. ARTCCs are built to ensure safe
and expeditious air travel. All Centers operate 7-days a
week, 24-hours a day, and employ a combination of several
hundred ATC specialists, electronic technicians, computer
system specialists, environmental support specialists, and
administrative staff. Figure 2-6 is an example of the Boston
ARTCC. The green lines mark the boundaries of the Boston
Center area, and the red lines mark the boundaries of
Military Operations Areas (MOAs), Prohibited, Restricted,
Alert, and Warning Areas.
Safe Separation Standards
The primary means of controlling aircraft is accomplished
by using highly sophisticated computerized radar systems.
In addition, the controller maintains two-way radio
communication with aircraft in his or her sector. In this
way, the specialist ensures that the aircraft are separated
by the following criteria:
• Laterally—5 miles
• Vertically—
1,000 feet (if the aircraft is below FL 290, or
between FL 290 and FL 410 for RVSM compliant
aircraft)
2,000 feet (if the aircraft is at FL 290 or above)
The controllers can accomplish this separation by issuing
instructions to the pilots of the aircraft involved. Altitude
assignments, speed adjustments, and radar vectors are
examples of instructions that might be issued to aircraft.
En route control is handled by pinpointing aircraft positions
through the use of flight progress strips. These strips are
pieces of printed paper containing pertinent information
extracted from the pilot’s flight plan. These strips are printed
20 minutes prior to an aircraft reaching each Center’s sector.
A flight progress strip tells the controller everything needed
to direct that aircraft. If the flight progress strips of each
aircraft approaching a sector are arranged properly, it is
possible to determine potential conflicts long before the
aircraft are even visible on the Center controller’s display.
In areas where radar coverage is not available, this is the
sole means of separating aircraft.
Figure 2-6. Boston Air Route Traffic Control Center.
The strips, one for each en route point from which the
pilot reports his or her position, are posted on a slotted
board in front of the air traffic controller. [Figure 2-7] At a
glance, he or she is able to see certain vital data: the type
of aircraft and who is flying it (airline, business, private,
or military pilot), aircraft registration number or flight
number, route, speed, altitude, airway designation, and the
estimated time of arrival (ETA) at destination. As the pilot
calls in the aircraft’s position and time at a predetermined
location, the strips are removed from their slots and filed.
Any change from the original flight plan is noted on the
strips as the flight continues. Thus, from a quick study of
the flight progress board, a controller can assess the overall
traffic situation and can avoid possible conflicts.
Figure 2-7. Flight progress strips.

Figure 2-8. Fort Worth Air Route Traffic Control Center.
Figure 2-8 shows the Fort Worth, Texas Air Route Traffic
Control Center (ZFW) and the geographical area that it
covers. The Center has approximately 350 controllers. Most
are certified and some are in on-the-job training.
Sectors
The airspace controlled by a Center may be further
administratively subdivided into smaller, manageable
pieces of airspace called sectors. A few sectors extend from
the ground up, but most areas are stratified into various
levels to accommodate a wide variety of traffic. Each sector
is staffed by a set of controllers and has a unique radio
frequency that the controller uses to communicate with
the pilots. As aircraft transition from one sector to another,
they are instructed to change to the radio frequency used
by the next sector. Each sector also has secure landline
communications with adjacent sectors, approach controls,
areas, ARTCCs, flight service centers, and military aviation
control facilities.
Figure 2-9. Low altitude sectors.
Figure 2-10. Intermediate altitude sectors.
Figure 2-11. High altitude sectors.
Figure 2-12. Ultra high altitude sectors.
The ARTCC at Fort Worth, Texas is subdivided into sectors
that are categorized as follows:

Eighteen low altitude sectors. [Figure 2-9]
Seven intermediate altitude sectors. [Figure 2-10]
Sixteen high altitude sectors. [Figure 2-11]
One ultra high altitude sector. [Figure 2-12]
From one to three controllers may work a sector, depending
upon the amount of air traffic. Each controller is assigned
to work the positions within an area of specialization.
Controllers have direct communication with pilots, with
surrounding sectors and Centers, plus the towers and Flight
Service Stations (FSS) under their jurisdiction. Each control
position is equipped with computer input and readout
devices for aircraft flight plan data.
The Center controllers have many decision support
tools (computer software programs) that provide vital
information to assist the controllers in maintaining safe
separation distances for all aircraft flying through their
sector. For example, one tool available allows the controller
to display the extended route of any aircraft on the radar
screen called a vector line. This line projects where the
aircraft will be within a specified number of minutes,
assuming the aircraft does not change its course. This is
a helpful tool to determine if aircraft flying intersecting
routes pass safely within the separation standard, or if they
conflict with each other. In addition to vector lines, the
controller can also display a route line for any given aircraft
on his or her radar screen. This tells the controller where
a particular aircraft is in specified number of minutes, as
well as the path the aircraft will fly to get there. Decision
support tools such as these help each controller look ahead
and avoid conflicts.
In-flight Requirements and Instructions
The CFRs require the pilot in command under IFR in
controlled airspace to continuously monitor an appropriate
Center or control frequency. When climbing after takeoff,
an IFR flight is either in contact with a radar-equipped local
departure control or, in some areas, an ARTCC facility. As
a flight transitions to the en route phase, pilots typically
expect a handoff from departure control to a Center
frequency if not already in contact with the Center.
The FAA National Aeronautical Information Services
publishes en route charts depicting Centers and sector
frequencies. [Figure 2-13] During handoff from one Center
to another, the previous controller assigns a new frequency.
In cases where flights may be out of range, the Center
frequencies on the face of the chart are very helpful. In
Figure 2-13, notice the boundary between Memphis,
Tennessee and Atlanta, Georgia Centers, and the remote
sites with discrete very high frequency (VHF) and ultra high
frequency (UHF) for communicating with the appropriate
NOT FOR NAVIGATION
MEMPHIS
Huntsville
ATLANTA
Chattanooga
132.05 353.8
MEMPHIS
ATLANTA
Figure 2-13. Air Route Traffic Control Centers and sector frequencies.

ARTCC. These Center frequency boxes can be used for
finding the nearest frequency within the aircraft range.
They also can be used for making initial contact with the
Center for clearances. The exact location for the Center
transmitter is not shown, although the frequency box is
placed as close as possible to the known location.
During the en route phase, as a flight transitions from one
Center facility to the next, a handoff or transfer of control
is required as previously described. The handoff procedure
is similar to the handoff between other radar facilities, such
as departure or approach control. During the handoff,
the controller whose airspace is being vacated issues
instructions that include the name of the facility to contact,
appropriate frequency, and other pertinent remarks.
Accepting radar vectors from controllers does not relieve
pilots of their responsibility for safety of flight. Pilots must
maintain a safe altitude and keep track of their position,
and it is their obligation to question controllers, request
an amended clearance, or, in an emergency, deviate from
their instructions if they believe that the safety of flight
is in doubt. Keeping track of altitude and position when
climbing, and during all other phases of flight, are basic
elements of situational awareness (SA). Aircraft equipped
with an enhanced ground proximity warning system
(EGPWS), terrain awareness and warning system (TAWS),
or traffic alert and collision avoidance system (TCAS) help
pilots detect and/or correct for potential unsafe proximities
to other aircraft and increases pilot(s) situational awareness.
Regardless of equipment, pilots must always maintain SA
regarding their location and the location of traffic in their
vicinity.
High Altitude Area Navigation Routing
Special high altitude routes allow pilots routing options for
flight within the initial high altitude routing (HAR) Phase
I expansion airspace. Pilots are able to fly user-preferred
routes, referred to as non-restrictive routing (NRR), between
specific fixes described by pitch (entry into) and catch (exit
out of) fixes in the HAR airspace. Pitch points indicate an
end of departure procedures, preferred IFR routings, or
other established routing programs where a flight can
begin a segment of NRR. The catch point indicates where
a flight ends a segment of NRR and joins published arrival
procedures, preferred IFR routing, or other established
routing programs.
The HAR Phase I expansion airspace is defined as that
airspace at and above FL 350 in fourteen of the western
and southern ARTCCs. The airspace includes Minneapolis
(ZMP), Chicago (ZAU), Kansas City (ZKC), Denver (ZDV),
Salt Lake City (ZLC), Oakland (ZOA), Seattle Centers (ZSE),
Los Angeles (ZLA), Albuquerque (ZAB), Fort Worth (ZFW),
Memphis (ZME), and Houston (ZHU). Jacksonville (ZJX)
and Miami (ZMA) are included for east-west routes only.
To develop a flight plan, select pitch and catch points
which can be found in the Chart Supplement (CS) based
upon your desired route across the Phase I airspace. Filing
requirements to pitch points, and from catch points, remain
unchanged from current procedures. For the portion of the
route between the pitch and catch points, NRR is permitted.
Where pitch points for a specific airport are not identified,
aircraft should file an appropriate departure procedure (DP),
or any other user preferred routing prior to the NRR portion
of their routing. Where catch points for a specific airport
are not identified aircraft should file, after the NRR portion
of their routing, an appropriate arrival procedure or other
user preferred routing to their destination.
Additionally, information concerning the location and
schedule of special use airspace (SUA) and Air Traffic
Control Assigned Airspace (ATCAA) can be found at http://
sua.faa.gov. ATCAA refers to airspace in the high altitude
structure supporting military and other special operations.
Pilots are encouraged to file around these areas when they
are scheduled to be active, thereby avoiding unplanned
reroutes around them.
In conjunction with the HAR program, area navigation
(RNAV) routes have been established to provide for a
systematic flow of air traffic in specific portions of the en
route flight environment. The designator for these RNAV
routes begin with the letter Q, for example, Q-501. Where
those routes aid in the efficient orderly management of air
traffic, they are published as preferred IFR routes.
Preferred IFR Routes
Preferred IFR routes are established between busier airports
to increase system efficiency and capacity. They normally
extend through one or more ARTCC areas and are designed
to achieve balanced traffic flows among high density
terminals. IFR clearances are issued on the basis of these
routes except when severe weather avoidance procedures
or other factors dictate otherwise. Preferred IFR routes are
listed in the CS and can also be found on www.fly.faa.gov,
which requires entering the following data: departure
airport designator, destination, route type, area, aircraft
types, altitude, route string, direction, departure ARTCC,
and arrival ARTCC. [Figure 2-14] If a flight is planned to or
from an area having such routes but the departure or arrival
point is not listed in the CS, pilots may use that part of a
preferred IFR route that is appropriate for the departure or
arrival point listed. Preferred IFR routes are correlated with
departure procedures (DPs) and STARs and may be defined
by airways, jet routes, direct routes between NAVAIDs,

Figure 2-14. Chart Supplement (includes Airport/Facility Directory
section).
waypoints, NAVAID radials/ distance measuring equipment
(DME), or any combinations thereof.
Preferred IFR routes are published in the CS for the low and
high altitude stratum. If they begin or end with an airway
number, it indicates that the airway essentially overlies
the airport and flights normally are cleared directly on the
airway. Preferred IFR routes beginning or ending with a fix
indicate that pilots may be routed to or from these fixes
via a SID route, radar vectors, or a STAR. Routes for major
terminals are listed alphabetically under the name of the
departure airport. Where several airports are in proximity,
they are listed under the principal airport and categorized as
a metropolitan area (e.g., New York Metro Area). One way
preferred IFR routes are listed is numerically, showing the
segment fixes and the direction and times effective. Where
more than one route is listed, the routes have equal priority
for use. Official location identifiers are used in the route
description for very high frequency omnidirectional ranges
(VORs) and very high frequency omnidirectional ranges/
tactical air navigation (VORTACs), and intersection names
are spelled out. The route is direct where two NAVAIDs, an
intersection and a NAVAID, a NAVAID and a NAVAID radial
and distance point, or any navigable combination of these
route descriptions follow in succession.
A system of preferred IFR routes helps pilots, flight crews,
and dispatchers plan a route of flight to minimize route
changes, and to aid in the efficient, orderly management
of air traffic using Federal airways. Preferred IFR routes
are designed to serve the needs of airspace users and
to provide for a systematic flow of air traffic in the major
terminal and en route flight environments. Cooperation by
Figure 2-15 Preferred IFR routes.

all pilots in filing preferred routes results in fewer air traffic
delays and better efficiency for departure, en route, and
arrival air traffic service. [Figure 2-15]
Substitute Airway or Route Structures
ARTCCs are responsible for specifying essential substitute
airway or route segments (sub-routes) and fixes for use
during scheduled or unscheduled VOR/VORTAC shutdowns.
Scheduled shutdowns of navigational facilities require
planning and coordination to ensure an uninterrupted
flow of air traffic. Aeronautical Information Services, in
coordination with the ARTCCs, determine when the length
of outages or other factors require publication of sub-
routes and Flight Program Operations (AJW-3) provides
flight inspection services, obstacle clearance verification,
certification, and final approval of substitute routes.
Substitute Airway En Route Flight Procedures
A schedule of proposed facility shutdowns within the region
is maintained and forwarded as far in advance as possible
to enable the substitute routes to be published. Substitute
routes are normally based on VOR/VORTAC facilities
established and published for use in the appropriate
altitude strata. In the case of substitute routes in the upper
airspace stratum, it may be necessary to establish routes by
reference to VOR/VORTAC facilities used in the low altitude
system. Non-directional (radio) beacon (NDB) facilities may
only be used where VOR/VORTAC coverage is inadequate
and ATC requirements necessitate use of such NAVAIDs.
Where operational necessity dictates, NAVAIDs may be
used beyond their standard service volume (SSV) limits that
define the reception limits of unrestricted NAVAIDs, which
are usable for random/unpublished route navigation,
provided that the routes can be given adequate frequency
protection.
Uncontrolled airspace
BCD vortac (shutdown)
ABC vortac
CDE vortac
Obstacle study and flight
inspection of sub-route required
(Centerline must be in
controlled airspace)
Figure 2-16 14 CFR Part 95 sub-routes.
Uncontrolled airspace
BCD vortac (shutdown)
ABC vortac
Off-airway sub-route
CDE vortac
Obstacle study and flight
inspection of sub-route required
Figure 2-17 Non-Part 95 sub-routes.

GHI vortac
IJK vortac (L)
HIJ vortac
Obstacle study flight
inspection and ESV’s
required
GHI vortac
IJK vortac (L)
HIJ vortac (shutdown)
60*
Figure 2-18 Sub-route wider than existing route.
The centerline of substitute routes must be contained
within controlled airspace [Figure 2-16], although substitute
routes for off-airway routes may not be in controlled air-
space. [Figure 2-17] Substitute routes are flight inspected
to verify clearance of controlling obstacles and to check for
satisfactory facility performance. If substitute routes do not
overlie existing routes, or are wider than existing routes,
map studies are required to identify controlling obstacles.
[Figure 2-18] The format for describing substitute routes
is from navigational fix to navigational fix. A minimum en
route altitude (MEA) and a maximum authorized altitude
(MAA) are provided for each route segment. Temporary
reporting points may be substituted for the out-of-service
facility and only those other reporting points that are
essential for ATC. Normally, temporary reporting points
over intersections are not necessary where Center radar
coverage exists. A minimum reception altitude (MRA) is
established for each temporary reporting point.
Tower En Route Control
Tower en route control (TEC) is an ATC program available
to pilots that provides a service to aircraft proceeding to
and from metropolitan areas. It links designated approach
control areas by a network of identified routes made up
of the existing airway structure of the NAS, which makes
it possible to fly an IFR flight without leaving approach
control airspace. [Figure 2-19] This service is designed
to help expedite air traffic and reduces ATC and pilot
communication requirements. The program is generally
used by non-turbojet aircraft operating at and below
10,000 feet but a few facilities, such as Milwaukee and
Chicago, have allowed turbojets to proceed between
city pairs. Participating flights are relatively short with a
duration of two hours or less.
TEC is referred to as tower en route, or tower-to-tower, and
allows flight beneath the en route structure. TEC reallocates
airspace both vertically and geographically to allow flight
planning between city pairs while remaining with approach
control airspace. All users are encouraged to use the TEC
route descriptions located in the CS when filing flight plans.
[Figure 2-20] All published TEC routes are designed to avoid
en route airspace, and the majority is within radar coverage.
Tower En Route Control Route Descriptions
The graphic depiction of TEC routes located in the CS is not
to be used for navigation or for detailed flight planning
because not all city pairs are depicted. The information
is intended to show geographic areas connected by TEC.
[Figure 2-19] Pilots should refer to the route descriptions
for specific flight planning.
As shown in Figure 2-20, the route description contains four
columns of information. The first column is the approach
control area within which the departure airport is located,
which are listed alphabetically. The second column shows
the specific route, airway, or radial that is to be used.
The third column shows the highest altitude allowed for

TOWER EN ROUTE CONTROL (TEC)
Northeast U.S. (Eastern)
(Lines connecting airports
depict adjacent approach
control facilities)
CLE
Radar approach control area
PIT
CKB
ROA
RIC
IAD
HAR
RDG
ABE
NYC
ACY
WRI
PHL
BWI
DOV
AVP
BGM
ELM
DCA
PXT
ORF
CRW
GSO
ERI
BUF
YNG
CAK
HTS
DC
PENNSYLVANIA
WEST VIRGINIA
VIRGINIA
MARYLAND
NEW JERSEY
DELAWARE
LEGEND
Figure 2-19. Tower En Route Control (TEC) Northeast U.S. (Eastern).
the route, and the fourth shows the destination airport,
which are also listed alphabetically. When flight planning,
it is important to always check current publications for
information about the departure and destination airport.
Routes are effective only during each respective terminal
facilities normal operating hours. Always check NOTAMs
to ensure that appropriate terminal facilities are operating
for the planned flight time. Altitudes are always listed in
thousands of feet. ATC may request that the pilot changes
altitude while in flight in order to maintain the flight within
approach control airspace. ATC provides radar monitoring
and, if necessary, course guidance if the highest altitude
assigned is below the MEA.
Shown in Figure 2-21, under the second column, the word
“Direct” appears as the route when radar vectors are used
or no airway exists. This also indicates that a SID or STAR
may be assigned by ATC. When a NAVAID or intersection
identifier appears with no airway immediately preceding
or following the identifier, the routing is understood to be
direct to or from that point unless otherwise cleared by ATC.
Routes beginning and ending with an airway indicate that
the airway essentially overflies the airport, or radar vectors
are issued. [Figure 2-21] Where more than one route is listed
to the same destination, ensure that the correct route for
the type of aircraft classification has been filed. These are
denoted after the route in the altitude column using J (jet
powered), M (turbo props/special, cruise speed 190 knots
or greater), P (non-jet, cruise speed 190 knots or greater),
or Q (non-jet, cruise speed 189 knots or less). [Figure 2-22]
Although all airports are not listed under the destination
column, IFR flights may be planned to satellite airports in
the proximity of major airports via the same routing. When
filing flight plans, the coded route identifier (i.e., BURL 1,
VTUL4, or POML3) may be used in lieu of the route of flight.

Highest
Route
Altitude Destination
............ V93 LRP V39 ETX
Allentown
............ V268 LEEAH V229
Atlantic City
............ V268 ENO V16 JFK V229 HFD CLOWW (Single
Bangor
engine and /E, /F. /G only)
............ V268 ENO V16 JFK V229 HFD CLOWW (Single
Bar Harbor
engine and /E, /F. /G only)
............ V93 LRP V499
Binghamton
............ V268 ENO V16 JFK V229
Boston (North)
HFD HFDO53 DREEM (Single engine only)
............ V268 ENO V16 JFK V229 HFD V3 WOONS
Boston
(Single engine only)
............ V268 ENO V16 JFK V229 BDR BDR014
Boston
JUDDS (Single engine only)
............ V268 ENO V16 JFK V229 BDR (Single
Bradley
engine only)
............ V268 ENO V16 JFK V229 BDR (Single
Bridgeport
engine only)
............ V31 HAR
Capital City
............ V268 ENO
Dover AFB
............ V44 MRB
Dulles
............ V268 ENO V16 JFK V229 BRD MAD
Groton
MAD126 MONDI (Single engine only)
TOWER EN ROUTE CONTROL
Approach Control Area
(Including Satellites)
Baltimore
Highest
Route
Altitude Destination
............ EJC V149 LHY
Albany
............ ETX LHY
Albany
............ V149 MAZIE ARD CYN
Atlantic City
............ V93 LRP
Baltimore
............ EXT V162 DUMMR V93 LRP
Baltimore
............ V39 LRP
Baltimore
............ V130
Bradley
............ Direct
Bradley
............ FJC STW
Caldwell
............ (2) EXT V30 SBJ
Farmingdale
............ ETX V162 HAR
Harrisburg
............ Direct
Hartford
............ EXT ETX004 WEISS
Hazleton
............ EXT V39
Lancaster
TOWER EN ROUTE CONTROL
Approach Control Area
(Including Satellites)
Allentown
Figure 2-20. Chart Supplement (NE), Tower En Route Control route descriptions (Baltimore).
Figure 2-21. Chart Supplement (NE), Tower En Route Control route descriptions (Allentown).

Highest
Route
Altitude Destination
............ V229 DIXIE V276 ARD
Allentown
............ V1 DIXIE V276 ARD (Single engine only)
Allentown
............ V1 ATR V308 OTT
Andrews, AFB
............ LEEAH V268 BAL
Baltimore
............ V1 JFK V229 HFD CLOWM (Single engine and
Bangor
/E, /F, /G only)
............ V1 JFK V229 HFD CLOWM (Single engine and
Bar Harbor
/E, /F, /G only)
............ V1 JFK V229 HFD HFD053 DREEM (Single
Boston (North)
(Single engine only)
............ V1 JFK V229 HFD V3 WOONS (Single engine
Boston
only
............ V1 JFK V229 HFD FOSTY WOONS (Single
Boston
engine only)
............ V1 JFK V229 BDR BDR14 JUDDS (Single
Bradley
engine only)
............ V184 ZIGGI JFK 210 JFK V229 BDR (Twins
Bridgeport
only, n/a between 1400-2100)
............ HOWIE V1 JFK V229 BDR (Single engine only)
Bridgeport
............ V184 00D DQO V469 HAR
Capital City
TOWER EN ROUTE CONTROL
Approach Control Area
(Including Satellites)
Atlantic City
Figure 2-22. Chart Supplement (NE), Tower En Route Control route descriptions (Atlantic City).
Airway and Route System
There are three fixed route systems established for
air navigation purposes. They are the Federal airway
consisting of VOR (low victor airways, high jet routes),
NDB (low or medium frequency) and the RNAV route
system. To the extent possible, these route systems are
aligned in an overlying manner to facilitate transition
between each. The majority of the airways are made up
of victor airways, jet routes, and RNAV, but some low/
medium frequency (L/MF) airways and routes are still
being used in Alaska and one other that is located off
the coast of North Carolina and is called Green 13 (G13).
[Figure 2-23]
Airway/Route Depiction
IFR en route charts show all IFR radio NAVAIDs that have
been flight-checked by the FAA and are operational. The
FAA, Aeronautical Information Services publishes and
distributes U.S. Government Civil Aeronautical Charts and
flight information publications. IFR en route navigation
information is provided on three charts: IFR en route low
Figure 2-23. Low frequency airway G13.
altitude chart, IFR en route high altitude chart, and Terminal
Area Chart (TAC). [Figure 2-24A and B]

Figure 2-24. IFR en route low altitude (left) and high altitude (right) charts.
IFR En Route Low Altitude Chart
En route low altitude charts provide aeronautical
information for navigation under IFR conditions below
18,000 feet MSL. Low altitude charts [Figure 2-25] include
the following information:
Airways [Figure 2-25A]
RNAV routes [Figure 2-25B]
Limits of controlled airspace [Figure 2-25C]
VHF radio aids to navigation (frequency, identification,
channel, geographic coordinates) [Figure 2-25D]
Airports that have an instrument approach procedure
or a minimum 3,000 foot hard surface runway
[Figure 2-25E]
Off-route obstruction clearance altitudes (OROCA)
[Figure 2-25F]
Reporting points [Figure 2-25G]
Special use airspace areas [Figure 2-25H]
Military training routes [Figure 2-25I]
IFR aeronautical charts depict VOR airways (airways based
on VOR or VORTAC NAVAIDs) in black, identified by a “V”
(Victor) followed by the route number (e.g., V12). [Figure
2-26] LF/MF airways (airways based on LF/MF NAVAIDs)
are sometimes referred to as colored airways because they
are identified by color name and number (e.g., Amber One,
charted as A1). Green and red airways are plotted east and
west, and amber and blue airways are plotted north and
south. Regardless of their color identifier, LF/MF airways
are depicted in brown. [Figure 2-27]
Airway/route data, such as the airway identifications,
bearings or radials, mileages, and altitude (e.g., MEA),
minimum obstacle clearance altitude (MOCA), and MAA,
are shown aligned with the airway and in the same color
as the airway. [Figure 2-26]
All airways/routes that are predicated on VOR or VORTAC
NAVAIDs are defined by the outbound radial from the
NAVAID. Airways/routes that are predicated on LF/MF
NAVAIDs are defined by the inbound bearing.
New low altitude RNAV routes have been created by the
FAA. RNAV routes provide more direct routing for IFR
aircraft and enhance the safety and efficiency of the NAS. In
order to utilize these routes, aircraft must be equipped with
IFR approved GNSS. In Alaska, when using RNAV routes, the
aircraft must be equipped with Technical Standing Order
(TSO)-145a and 146a equipment.
Low altitude RNAV only routes are identified by the letter
“T” prefix, followed by a three digit number (T-200 to T-500).
RNAV routes are depicted in aeronautical blue, as well as the
RNAV route data, which includes the following [Figure 2-28]:
Route line
Identification boxes

Figure 2-25. Information found on en route low altitude charts.
Figure 2-26. Victor airways.
Figure 2-27. LF/MF airways.
E
VALENTINE
Miller Fld
(VTN)
L
VALENTINE
314 VTN
TAFOY
F
x
D
G
A
Victor Route (with RNAV/GPS
MEA shown in blue)
*35 00
3 50 0G
B
5000G
*5400
6000G
NGOZI
GRANT
Waypoint
Magnetic reference bearing
C
Hot Springs Muni
(HSR)
L
AINSWORTH
112.7 ANW 74
N42°34.15' W99°59.38'
H
COLUMBUS
D
+
H
SPECIAL USE AIRSPACE
MOA
MOA
Exclusion area and note
Line delimits
internal separation
of same special
use area or
exclusion areas
I
AINSWORTH
114.0 MAI 87
N30°47.17' W85°07.47'
GAINESVILLE

Figure 2-28. Low altitude RNAV routes.
Mileages
Waypoints
Waypoint names
Magnetic reference bearings
MEAs
Magnetic reference bearings are shown originating from a
waypoint, fix/reporting point, or NAVAID. A GNSS MEA for
each segment is established to ensure obstacle clearance
Figure 2-29. Low altitude RNAV route data.
and communications reception. All MEAs are identified
with a “G” suffix. [Figure 2-29]
Joint Victor/RNAV routes are depicted using black for
the victor airways and blue for the RNAV routes, and the
identification boxes for each are shown adjacent to one
another. Magnetic reference bearings are not shown. MEAs
are stacked in pairs or in two separate columns, GNSS
and Victor. On joint routes, or victor routes, RNAV specific
information is printed in blue. [Figure 2-30]
5000G
*5400
6000G
NGOZI
GRANT
Waypoint
Magnetic reference bearing
JES
VAL
BILLY
TOMMY
YATES
7000G
*6700
8000G
*6700
Figure 2-30. Joint Victor/RNAV airway.

N39'
DRIVL
SAAGS
CORIM
HUGIN
FONIX
KIDER
BRAYMER
BQS[L] 49
NAPOLEON
ANX[L] 87
ROBINSON
RBA[L] 19
COLUMBIA 122.6
115.9 SUM 106
ST JOSEPH
Rosaceach Mem
[STJ]
Sherman AAF
(FLV)
Lawrence Muni
(LWC)
TOPEKA
Philip Billard Muni
(TOP)
Kansas City Intl
(MCI)
KANSAS CITY
Charles B Wheeler
Downtown
(MKC)
MOSBY
Midwest National
Air Control
(GPH)
Marshall Mem Muni
(MHI)
AGENT
091°
190°
060°
Figure 2-31. IFR en route high altitude chart.
IFR En Route High Altitude Chart
En route high altitude charts provide aeronautical
information for navigation under IFR conditions at and
above FL 180. [Figure 2-31] High altitude charts include
the following information:
Jet route structure
RNAV Q-routes
VHF radio aids to navigation (frequency, ID, channel,
geographic coordinates)
Selected airports
Reporting points
Navigation reference system (NRS) waypoints
[Figure 2-32]
Jet routes are depicted in black with a “J” identifier followed
by the route number (e.g., “J12”) and are based on VOR or
Figure 2-32. Navigation reference system (NRS) waypoints.
W122°
N40°
RED BLUFF
115.7 RBA 104
H
Chico Muni
(CIC)
KO63E
KO60E
Redding Muni
(RDD)
Red Bluff Muni
(RBL)
MEA-24000D
MEA CAP
MEA-24000D
MEA-26000D
Waypoint
Waypoint
RANCHO MURIETA
N40°05.93'
W122°14.18'
VORTAC NAVAIDs. [Figure 2-33] RNAV “Q” Route MEAs are
shown when other than 18,000 feet. [Figure 2-34] MEAs
for GNSS RNAV aircraft are identified with a “G” suffix.
MEAs for DME/DME/IRU RNAV aircraft do not have a “G”
suffix. All RNAV routes and associated data is charted in
aeronautical blue and magnetic reference bearings are
(OFTEC)
SAKES
Green River Muni
(U34)
Honksville
MOAB
Camyonland’s Fld
(CNY)
CEDAR CITY 111.2
X
Figure 2-33. High altitude jet routes.

Figure 2-34. MEAs on RNAV (Q) routes.
MEA-24000D
MEA-24000D
MEA-26000D
115.9 SUM 106
ENVIE
FINER
HOMEG
OTTOO
W123°
MEA - 23000G
JointJet/RNAV Route
Figure 2-35. Joint jet/RNAV routes.
shown originating from a waypoint, fix/reporting point, or
NAVAID. When joint Jet/RNAV routes are depicted, the route
identification boxes are located adjacent to each other with
the route charted in black. [Figure 2-35] With the exception
of “Q” routes in the Gulf of Mexico, GNSS or DME/DME/IRU
RNAV equipment is required along with radar monitoring
capabilities. For aircraft that have DME/DME/IRU RNAV
equipment, refer to the CS for specific DME information.
VHF Airways
Victor airways are a system of established routes that
run along specified VOR radials, from one VOR station to
another. The purpose is to make flight planning easier
and they help ATC to organize and regulate the air traffic
flow. Almost all commercial flights are routed along these
airways but they are available for use by any pilot provided
that the proper altitudes are employed.
Victor Airway Navigation Procedures
The procedure for getting established on a victor airway
is to either fly directly to a nearby VOR or to intercept
an airway radial along the route of flight. Once the pilot
is established on an airway, it is important to follow the
procedures and guidelines put in place to ensure air traffic
separation and optimal safety on the airway. When using
victor airways for navigation, procedures do not allow the
pilot to jump from one VOR to another, but must navigate
from one to the next by using the alternating outbound/
inbound procedure of linking VORs. For example, when
departing from Zanesville VOR on V-214, the pilot selects
the 090° radial with a FROM indication on the course
deviation indicator (CDI) and should correct as necessary
to continuously maintain track on the centerline of the
airway. [Figure 2-36] The pilot should continue on this
course until it is time to change over to the inbound course
to the Bellaire VOR.
LF/MF Airways
The basic LF/MF airway width is 4.34 nautical miles (NM)
on each side of the centerline; the width expands by five
degrees when the distance from the facility providing
course guidance is greater than 49.66 NM. [Figure 2-37]
En Route Obstacle Clearance Areas
All published routes in the NAS are based on specific
obstacle clearance criteria. An understanding of en route
obstacle clearance areas helps with SA and may help avoid
controlled flight into terrain (CFIT). Obstacle clearance
areas for the en route phase of flight are identified as
primary, secondary, and turning areas.
The primary and secondary area obstacle clearance
criteria, airway and route widths, and the ATC separation
procedures for en route segments are a function of
safety and practicality in flight procedures. These flight
procedures are dependent upon the pilot, the aircraft, and
the navigation system being used, resulting in a total VOR
system accuracy factor along with an associated probability

SABGE
090°
N40°
LORES
ZANDR
MUNCE
HISOM
Barnesville Brodfield
(6G5)
4D
L
[2P7]
1187 L*28
Cambridge Muni
(CDI)
L
Zoneville Muni
(ZZV)
L
ZANESVILLE
111.4 ZZV 51
N42°34.15' W99°59.38'
A
CLEVELAND
122.5 122.2 122.1R
BELLAIRE
117.1AIR 118
N40°31.00' W99°49.04'
A
CLEVELAND
122.1R
CLEVELAND
Bolonl
120.4 257.975
Figure 2-36. Zanesville VOR/Victor Airway 214.
5°
NBD
4.34 NM
49.66 NM
NBD
5°
5°
5°
Figure 2-37. LF/MR airway width.
factor. The pilot/aircraft information component of these
criteria includes pilot ability to track the radial and the flight
track resulting from turns at various speeds and altitudes
under different wind conditions. The navigation system
information includes navigation facility radial alignment
displacement, transmitter monitor tolerance, and receiver
accuracy. All of these factors were considered during
development of en route criteria. From this analysis, the
computations resulted in a total system accuracy of ±4.5°
95 percent of the time and ±6.7° 99 percent of the time.
The 4.5° value became the basis for primary area obstacle
clearance criteria, airway and route widths, and the ATC
separation procedures. The 6.7° value provides secondary
obstacle clearance area dimensions.
Primary and Secondary En Route Obstacle
Clearance Areas
The primary obstacle clearance area has a protected width
of 8 NM with 4 NM on each side of the centerline. The
primary area has widths of route protection based upon
system accuracy of a ±4.5° angle from the NAVAID. These
4.5° lines extend out from the NAVAID and intersect the
boundaries of the primary area at a point approximately
51 NM from the NAVAID. Ideally, the 51 NM point is where
pilots would change over from navigating away from the
facility, to navigating toward the next facility, although this
ideal is rarely achieved. [Figure 2-38]
4.5°
4.5°
4.5°
4.5°
4 NM
4 NM
Primary obstacle clearance area
Figure 2-38. Primary obstacle clearance area.

Primary en route obstacle clearance area
1,000 feet above highest obstacle
Figure 2-39. Non-mountainous obstacle clearance in the primary
area.
If the distance from the NAVAID to the change-over point
(COP) is more than 51 NM, the outer boundary of the
primary area extends beyond the 4 NM width along the
4.5° line when the COP is at midpoint. This means the
primary area, along with its obstacle clearance criteria, is
extended out into what would have been the secondary
area. Additional differences in the obstacle clearance area
result in the case of the effect of an offset COP or dogleg
segment. For protected en route areas, the minimum
obstacle clearance in the primary area, not designated as
mountainous under 14 CFR Part 95—IFR altitude, is 1,000
feet over the highest obstacle. [Figure 2-39] The secondary
obstacle clearance area extends along a line 2 NM on each
side of the primary area. Navigation system accuracy in
the secondary area has widths of route protection of a
Figure 2-41. Primary and secondary obstacle clearance area.
±6.7° angle from the NAVAID. These 6.7° lines intersect the
outer boundaries of the secondary areas at the same point
as primary lines, 51 NM from the NAVAID. If the distance
from the NAVAID to the COP is more than 51 NM, the
secondary area extends along the 6.7° line when the COP
is at mid-point. [Figure 2-40] In all areas, mountainous and
non-mountainous, obstacles that are located in secondary
areas are considered as obstacles to air navigation if they
extend above the secondary obstacle clearance plane.
This plane begins at a point 500 feet above the obstacles
(natural or man-made) upon which the primary obstacle
clearance area is based, and slants upward at an angle that
causes it to intersect the outer edge of the secondary area
at a point 500 feet higher. [Figure 2-41]
Changeover Points
When flying airways, pilots normally change frequencies
midway between NAVAIDs, although there are times
when this is not practical. If the navigation signals cannot
be received from the second VOR at the midpoint of the
route, a COP is depicted and shows the distance in NM to
each NAVAID. [Figure 2-42] COPs indicate the point where a
frequency change is necessary to receive course guidance
from the facility ahead of the aircraft instead of the one
6.7°
6.7°
6.7°
6.7°
4 NM
4 NM
2 NM
Secondary obstacle clearance area
2 NM
Figure 2-40. Secondary obstacle clearance area.

13,000 ft
13,000
Figure 2-42. Changeover points.
behind. These COPs divide an airway or route segment and
ensure continuous reception of navigation signals at the
prescribed minimum en route IFR altitude. They also ensure
that other aircraft operating within the same portion of
an airway or route segment receive consistent azimuth
signals from the same navigation facilities regardless of
the direction of flight.
Where signal coverage from two VORs overlaps at the MEA,
the COP normally is designated at the midpoint. Where
radio frequency interference or other navigation signal
problems exist, the COP is placed at the optimum location,
taking into consideration the signal strength, alignment
error, or any other known condition that affects reception.
The COP has an effect on the primary and secondary
obstacle clearance areas. On long airway or route segments,
if the distance between two facilities is over 102 NM and the
COP is placed at the midpoint, the system accuracy lines
extend beyond the minimum widths of 8 and 12 NM, and a
flare or spreading outward results at the COP. [Figure 2-43]
Offset COP and dogleg segments on airways or routes can
also result in a flare at the COP.
Direct Route Flights
Direct route flights are flights that are not flown on the
radials or courses of established airways or routes. Direct
route flights must be defined by indicating the radio fixes
over which the flight passes. Fixes selected to define the
route should be those over which the position of the aircraft
can be accurately determined. Such fixes automatically
become compulsory reporting points for the flight, unless
advised otherwise by ATC. Only those NAVAIDs established
Figure 2-43. Changeover point effect on long airway or route segment.
4.5°
6.7°
4.5°
6.7°
4 NM
4 NM
Secondary areas
Primary areas
2 NM
2 NM
Flare
Flare

NOT FOR NAVIGATION
OR NAVIGAT
Figure 2-44. Direct route navigation.
for use in a particular structure (i.e., in the low or high
structures) may be used to define the en route phase of a
direct flight within that altitude structure.
Figure 2-44 shows a straight line on a magnetic course
from SCRAN intersection of 270° direct to the Fort Smith
Regional Airport in Arkansas that passes just north of
restricted areas R-2401A and B and R-2402. Since the airport
and the restricted areas are precisely plotted, there is an
assurance that you will stay north of the restricted areas.
From a practical standpoint, it might be better to fly direct
to the Wizer NDB. This route goes even further north of the
restricted areas and places you over the final approach fix
to Runway 25 at Fort Smith.
The azimuth feature of VOR aids and the azimuth and
distance (DME) features of VORTAC and TACAN aids are
assigned certain frequency protected areas of airspace that
are intended for application to established airway and route
use and to provide guidance for planning flights outside
of established airways or routes. These areas of airspace
are expressed in terms of cylindrical service volumes of
specified dimensions called class limits or categories.
An operational service volume has been established
for each class in which adequate signal coverage and
frequency protection can be assured. To facilitate use
of VOR, VORTAC, or TACAN aids, consistent with their
operational service volume limits, pilot use of such aids
for defining a direct route of flight in controlled airspace
should not exceed the following:
1. Operations above FL 450—use NAVAIDs not more
than 200 NM apart. These aids are depicted on en
route high altitude charts.
2. Operation off established routes from 18,000 feet
MSL to FL 450—use NAVAIDs not more than 260
NM apart. These aids are depicted on en route high
altitude charts.
3. Operation off established airways below 18,000 feet
MSL—use NAVAIDs not more than 80 NM apart.
These aids are depicted on en route low altitude charts.
4. Operation off established airways between 14,500

feet MSL and 17,999 feet MSL in the conterminous
United States—(H) facilities not more than 200 NM
apart may be used.
Increasing use of self-contained airborne navigational
systems that do not rely on the VOR/VORTAC/TACAN
system has resulted in pilot requests for direct routes that
exceed NAVAID service volume limits. These direct route
requests are approved only in a radar environment with
approval based on pilot responsibility for navigation on the
authorized direct route. Radar flight following is provided
by ATC for ATC purposes. At times, ATC initiates a direct
route in a radar environment that exceeds NAVAID service
volume limits. In such cases, ATC provides radar monitoring
and navigational assistance as necessary.
When filing for a direct route flight, airway or jet route
numbers, appropriate to the stratum in which operation
is conducted, may also be included to describe portions
of the route to be flown. The following is an example of
how a direct route flight would be written.
MDW V262 BDF V10 BRL STJ SLN GCK
Spelled out: from Chicago Midway Airport via Victor
262 to Bradford, Victor 10 to Burlington, Iowa, direct St.
Joseph, Missouri, direct Salina, Kansas, direct Garden
City, Kansas.
Note: When route of flight is described by radio fixes,
the pilot is expected to fly a direct course between the
points named.
Pilots should keep in mind that they are responsible
for adhering to obstruction clearance requirements
on those segments of direct routes that are outside of
controlled airspace. The MEAs and other altitudes shown
on low altitude IFR en route charts pertain to those route
segments within controlled airspace, and those altitudes
may not meet obstruction clearance criteria when
operating off those routes.
Published RNAV Routes
Published RNAV routes are fixed, permanent routes that
can be flight planned and flown by aircraft with RNAV
capability. These are being expanded worldwide as
new RNAV routes are developed, and existing charted,
conventional routes are being designated for RNAV use. It
is important to be alert to the rapidly changing application
of RNAV techniques being applied to conventional en
route airways. Published RNAV routes may potentially be
found on any en route chart. The published RNAV route
designation may be obvious, or, on the other hand, RNAV
route designations may be less obvious, as in the case
where a published route shares a common flight track with
a conventional airway.
Note: The use of RNAV is dynamic and rapidly changing;
therefore, en route charts are continuously being updated
for information changes, and you may find some differences
between charts.
Basic designators for air traffic service (ATS) routes and
their use in voice communications have been established.
One of the main purposes of a system of route designators
is to allow both pilots and ATC to make unambiguous
reference to RNAV airways and routes. Basic designators
for ATS routes consist of a maximum of five, and in no
case to exceed six, alpha/numeric characters in order to be
usable by both ground and airborne automation systems.
The designator indicates the type of the route, such as
high/low altitude, specific airborne navigation equipment
requirements, such as RNAV, and the aircraft type using the
route primarily and exclusively. The basic route designator
consists of one or two letter(s) followed by a number from
1 to 999.
Composition of Designators
The prefix letters that pertain specifically to RNAV
designations are included in the following list:
1. The basic designator consists of one letter of the
alphabet followed by a number from 1 to 999. The
letters may be:
a.
A, B, G, R—for routes that form part of the
regional networks of ATS route and are not
RNAV routes;
b.
L, M, N, P—for RNAV routes that form part of
the regional networks of ATS routes;
c.
H, J, V, W—for routes that do not form part of
the regional networks of ATS routes and are not
RNAV routes;
d.
Q, T, Y, Z—for RNAV routes that do not form
part of the regional networks of ATS routes.
2. Where applicable, one supplementary letter must be
added as a prefix to the basic designator as follows:
a. K—to indicate a low level route established for
use primarily by helicopters;
b. U—to indicate that the route or portion thereof
is established in the upper airspace;
c. S—to indicate a route established exclusively for
use by supersonic aircraft during acceleration/
deceleration and while in supersonic flight.
3. Where applicable, a supplementary letter may be
added after the basic designator of the ATS route as
a suffix as follows:

Figure 2-45. Published RNAV jet routes.
NOT FOR NAVIGATION
N60°53.97´ W 151°2163´
114.3 ANC 221.3°-37.0
AMOTT
J888R
J996R
J804R
61°
226°
AMOTT
a.
F—to indicate that on the route or portion thereof
advisory service only is provided;
b.
G—to indicate that on the route or portion thereof
flight information services only is provided;
c.
Y—for RNP 1 routes at and above FL 200 to
indicate that all turns on the route between 30°
and 90° must be made within the tolerance of a
tangential arc between the straight leg segments
defined with a radius of 22.5 NM;
d.
Z—for RNP 1 routes at and below FL 190 to
indicate that all turns on the route between 30°
and 90° should be made within the tolerance
of a tangential arc between the straight leg
segments defined with a radius of 15 NM.
Note: RNAV Q-routes require en route RNAV 2, corresponding
NAV/E2 code and PBN/C1-C4 based on navigation system
update source.
Use of Designators in Communications
In voice communications, the basic letter of a designator
should be spoken in accordance with the International Civil
Aviation Organization (ICAO) spelling alphabet. Where the
prefixes K, U, or S, previously mentioned, are used in voice
communications, they should be pronounced as:
K—Kopter
U—Upper, as in the English language
S—Supersonic
Where suffixes F, G, Y or Z specified in above, are used, the
flight crew should not be required to use them in voice
communications. Below is an example of how the letters
and numbers are spoken.
A11—Alpha Eleven
UR5—Upper Romeo Five
KB34—Kopter Bravo Thirty Four
UW456—Upper Whiskey Four Fifty Six

The en route chart excerpt depicts three published RNAV jet
routes: J804R, J888R, and J996R. [Figure 2-45] The R suffix
is a supplementary route designator denoting an RNAV
route. The overlapping symbols for the AMOTT intersection
and waypoint indicate that AMOTT can be identified by
conventional navigation or by latitude and longitude
coordinates. Although coordinates were originally included
for aircraft equipped with an inertial navigation system
(INS), they are now a good way to cross check between
the coordinates on the chart and in the flight management
system (FMS) or global positioning system (GPS) databases
to ensure you are tracking on your intended en route
course. The AMOTT RNAV waypoint includes bearing and
distance from the Anchorage VORTAC.
Random RNAV Routes
Random RNAV routes are direct routes that are based on
RNAV capability between waypoints defined in terms of
latitude or longitude coordinates, degree-distance fixes,
or offsets from established routes or airways at a specified
distance and direction. Radar monitoring by ATC is required
on all random RNAV routes. Random RNAV routes can
only be approved in a radar environment. Factors that
are considered by ATC when approving random RNAV
routes include the capability to provide radar monitoring
and compatibility with traffic volume and flow. ATC radar
monitor each flight; however, navigation on the random
RNAV route is the responsibility of the pilot.
Pilots flying aircraft that are equipped with approved area
navigation equipment may file for RNAV routes throughout
the NAS and may be filed for in accordance with the
following procedures:
1.
File airport-to-airport flight plans.
2.
File the appropriate RNAV capability certification
suffix in the flight plan.
3.
Plan the random route portion of the flight plan
to begin and end over appropriate arrival and
departure transition fixes or appropriate NAVAIDs
for the altitude stratum within which the flight is
conducted. The use of normal preferred DPs and
STAR, where established, is recommended.
4.
File route structure transitions to and from the
random route portion of the flight.
5.
Define the random route by waypoints. File route
description waypoints by using degree distance fixes
based on navigational aids that are appropriate for
the altitude stratum.
6.
File a minimum of one route description waypoint
for each ARTCC through whose area the random
route is flown. These waypoints must be located
within 200 NM of the preceding center’s boundary.
7. File an additional route description waypoint for
each turnpoint in the route.
8. Plan additional route description waypoints as
required to ensure accurate navigation via the filed
route of flight. Navigation is the pilot’s responsibility
unless ATC assistance is requested.
9. Plan the route of flight so as to avoid prohibited and
restricted airspace by 3 NM unless permission has
been obtained to operate in that airspace and the
appropriate ATC facilities are advised.
Note: To be approved for use in the NAS, RNAV equipment
must meet the appropriate system availability, accuracy,
and airworthiness standards. For additional guidance
on equipment requirements, see Advisory Circular (AC)
20-138C, Airworthiness Approval of Positioning and
Navigation Systems. For airborne navigation database,
see AC 90-105, Approval Guidance for RNP Operations
and Barometric Vertical Navigation in the U.S. National
Airspace System.
Pilots flying aircraft that are equipped with latitude/
longitude coordinate navigation capability, independent
of VOR/ TACAN references, may file for random RNAV routes
at and above FL 390 within the conterminous United States
using the following procedures:
1. File airport-to-airport flight plans prior to departure.
2. File the appropriate RNAV capability certification
suffix in the flight plan.
3. Plan the random route portion of the flight to
begin and end over published departure/arrival
transition fixes or appropriate NAVAIDs for airports
without published transition procedures. The use of
preferred departure and arrival routes, such as DP
and STAR where established, is recommended.
4. Plan the route of flight so as to avoid prohibited and
restricted airspace by 3 NM unless permission has
been obtained to operate in that airspace and the
appropriate ATC facility is advised.
5. Define the route of flight after the departure fix,
including each intermediate fix (turnpoint) and
the arrival fix for the destination airport in terms
of latitude/longitude coordinates plotted to the
nearest minute or in terms of Navigation Reference
System (NRS) waypoints. For latitude/longitude
filing, the arrival fix must be identified by both the
latitude/ longitude coordinates and a fix identifier
as shown in the example below.
MIA1 SRQ2 3407/106153 3407/11546 TNP4 LAX5
1Departure airport

2Departure fix
3Intermediate fix (turning point)
4Arrival fix
5Destination airport
Or:
ORD1 IOW2 KP49G3 KD34U4 KL16O5 OAL6 MOD27
1Departure airport
2Transition fix (pitch point)
3Minneapolis ARTCC waypoint
4Denver ARTCC waypoint
5Los Angeles ARTCC waypoint (catch point)
6Transition fix
7Arrival
8Destination airport
6. Record latitude/longitude coordinates by four
figures describing latitude in degrees and minutes
followed by a solidus and five figures describing
longitude in degrees and minutes.
7. File at FL 390 or above for the random RNAV portion
of the flight.
8. Fly all routes/route segments on Great Circle tracks.
9. Make any in-flight requests for random RNAV
clearances or route amendments to an en route ATC
facility.
Figure 2-46. Excerpt of authorized areas of en route operation.
SAMPLE NOT FOR
ACTUAL USE
The 48 contiguous United
States and the District of
Columbia
Canada, excluding Canadian
MNPS airspace and the areas
of magnetic unreliability as
established in the Canadian
AIP
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS:
Note 1 - B-737 Class II navigation operations with a single long-
range system is authorized only within this area of en route
operation.
Note 3 - Only B-747 and DC-10 operations authorized in these
areas.
Authorized areas of
en route operation
Limitations, provisions,
and reference paragraphs
Off-Airway Routes
14 CFR Part 95 prescribes altitudes governing the operation
of aircraft under IFR on Federal airways, jet routes, RNAV low
or high altitude routes, and other direct routes for which a
MEA is designated. In addition, it designates mountainous
areas and COPs. Off-airway routes are established in the
same manner and in accordance with the same criteria
as airways and jet routes. If a pilot flies for a scheduled air
carrier or operator for compensation or hire, any requests for
the establishment of off-airway routes are initiated by the
company through the principal operations inspector (POI)
who works directly with the company and coordinates FAA
approval. Air carrier authorized routes should be contained
in the company’s Operations Specifications (OpSpecs) under
the auspices of the air carrier operating certificate. [Figure
2-46]
Off-airway routes predicated on public navigation
facilities and wholly contained within controlled airspace
are published as direct Part 95 routes. Off-airway routes
predicated on privately owned navigation facilities or
not contained wholly within controlled airspace are
published as off-airway non-Part 95 routes. In evaluating
the adequacy of off-airway routes, the following items are
considered: the type of aircraft and navigation systems
used; proximity to military bases, training areas, low level
military routes; and the adequacy of communications
along the route.
Commercial operators planning to fly off-airway routes
should have specific instructions in the company’s
OpSpecs that address en route limitations and provisions
regarding en route authorizations to use the GPS or other
RNAV systems in the NAS. The company’s manuals and
checklists should include practices and procedures for
long-range navigation and training on the use of long
range navigation equipment. Minimum equipment lists
(MELs) and maintenance programs must address the long
range navigation equipment. Examples of other selected
areas requiring specialized en route authorization include
the following:
Class I navigation in the United States Class A
airspace using area of long range navigation system.
Class II navigation using multiple long range
navigation systems.
Operations in central East Pacific airspace.
North Pacific operations.
Operations within North Atlantic (NAT) minimum
navigation performance specifications (MNPS)
airspace.

Operations in areas of magnetic unreliability.
North Atlantic operation (NAT/OPS) with two engine
aircraft under 14 CFR Part 121.
Extended range operations (ER-OPS) with two
engine aircraft under 14 CFR Part 121.
Special fuel reserves in international operations.
Planned in-flight re-dispatch or re-release en route.
Extended over water operations using a single long-
range communication system.
Operations in reduced vertical separation minimum
(RVSM) airspace.
Off-Route Obstruction Clearance Altitude
An off-route obstruction clearance altitude (OROCA) is
an off-route altitude that provides obstruction clearance
with a 1,000-foot buffer in non-mountainous terrain areas
and a 2,000-foot buffer in designated mountainous areas
within the United States. This altitude may not provide
signal coverage from ground-based NAVAIDs, ATC radar,
or communications coverage. OROCAs are intended
primarily as a pilot tool for emergencies and SA. OROCAs
depicted on en route charts do not provide the pilot with
an acceptable altitude for terrain and obstruction clearance
for the purposes of off-route, random RNAV direct flights
in either controlled or uncontrolled airspace. OROCAs
are not subject to the same scrutiny as MEAs, minimum
vectoring altitude (MVAs), MOCAs, and other minimum IFR
altitudes. Since they do not undergo the same obstruction
evaluation, airport airspace analysis procedures, or
flight inspection, they cannot provide the same level of
confidence as the other minimum IFR altitudes.
When departing an airport VFR intending to or needing to
obtain an IFR clearance en route, you must be aware of the
position of your aircraft relative to terrain and obstructions.
When accepting a clearance below the MEA, MIA, MVA,
or the OROCA, you are responsible for your own terrain/
obstruction clearance until reaching the MEA, MIA, or MVA.
If unable to visually maintain terrain/obstruction clearance,
pilots should advise ATC and state intentions of the flight.
[Figure 2-47]
NOT FOR NAVIGATION
Figure 2-47. Off-route obstacle clearance altitude.

Figure 2-48. Random RNAV route.
For all random RNAV flights, there needs to be at least one
waypoint in each ARTCC area through which you intend
to fly. One of the biggest problems in creating an RNAV
direct route is determining if the route goes through special
use airspace. For most direct routes, the chances of going
through prohibited, restricted, or special use airspace
are good. In the United States, all direct routes should be
planned to avoid prohibited or restricted airspace by at
least 3 NM. If a bend in a direct route is required to avoid
special use airspace, the turning point needs to be part
of the flight plan. Two of the most prominent long range
navigation systems today include FMS with integrated GPS
and stand-alone GPS. The following example is a simplified
overview showing how the RNAV systems might be used
to fly a random RNAV route.
Shown in Figure 2-48, the aircraft is northeast of Tuba City
VORTAC at FL 200 using RNAV (showing both GPS and
FMS), RNAV direct on a southwesterly heading to Lindbergh
Regional Airport in Winslow. As the pilot is monitoring his
or her position and cross-checking the avionics against the
high altitude en route chart, he or she receives a company

message instructing to divert to Las Vegas, requiring a
change in the flight plan as highlighted on the depicted
chart excerpt.
During the flight deck review of the high and low altitude
en route charts, the pilot determines that the best course
of action is to fly direct to the MIRAJ waypoint, 28 DME
northeast of the Las Vegas VORTAC on the 045° radial. This
places the aircraft 193 NM out on a 259° magnetic course
inbound, and may help to avoid diverting north, allowing to
bypass the more distant originating and intermediate fixes
feeding into Las Vegas. The pilot requests an RNAV random
route clearance direct MIRAJ to expedite the flight. Denver
Center comes back with the following amended flight plan
and initial clearance into Las Vegas:
“Marathon five sixty four, turn right heading two six zero,
descend and maintain one six thousand, cleared present
position direct MIRAJ.”
The latitude and longitude coordinates of the aircraft’s
present position on the high altitude chart is N36 19.10
and W110 40.24 as the course is changed. Notice the GPS
moving map (upper left), the FMS control display unit
(below the GPS), and FMS map mode navigation displays
(to the right of the GPS) as the flight is rerouted to Las Vegas.
For SA, the pilot makes note that the altitude is well above
any of the OROCAs on the direct route as the flight arrives
in the Las Vegas area using the low altitude chart.
Monitoring of Navigation Facilities
VOR, VORTAC, and instrument landing system (ILS) facilities,
as well as most NDBs and marker beacons installed by the
FAA, are provided with an internal monitoring feature.
Internal monitoring is provided at the facility through
the use of equipment that causes a facility shutdown if
performance deteriorates below established tolerances.
A remote status indicator also may be provided through
the use of a signal-sampling receiver, microwave link, or
telephone circuit. Older FAA NDBs and some non-Federal
NDBs do not have the internal feature, and monitoring is
accomplished by manually checking the operation at least
once each hour. FAA facilities, such as automated flight
service stations (AFSSs) and ARTCCs/sectors, are usually
the control point for NAVAID facility status. Pilots can query
the appropriate FAA facility if they have questions in flight
regarding NAVAID status, in addition to checking NOTAMs
prior to flight, since NAVAIDs and associated monitoring
equipment are continuously changing.
Navigational Gaps
A navigational course guidance gap, referred to as an
MEA gap, describes a distance along an airway or route
segment where a gap in navigational signal coverage
exists. The navigational gap may not exceed a specific
distance that varies directly with altitude, from 0 NM at sea
level to 65 NM at 45,000 feet MSL and not more than one
gap may exist in the airspace structure for the airway or
route segment. Additionally, a gap usually does not occur
at any airway or route turning point. To help ensure the
maximum amount of continuous positive course guidance
available when flying, there are established en route criteria
for both straight and turning segments. Where large gaps
exist that require altitude changes, MEA “steps” may be
established at increments of not less than 2,000 feet below
18,000 feet MSL, or not less than 4,000 feet at 18,000 MSL
and above, provided that a total gap does not exist for the
entire segment within the airspace structure. MEA steps are
limited to one step between any two facilities to eliminate
continuous or repeated changes of altitude in problem areas.
The allowable navigational gaps pilots can expect to see
are determined, in part, by reference to the graph depicted
in Figure 2-49. Notice the en route chart excerpt depicting
that the MEA is established with a gap in navigation signal
coverage northwest of the Carbon VOR/DME on V134. At
the MEA of 13,000, the allowable navigation course guidance
gap is approximately 18.5 NM, as depicted in Figure 2-49.
The navigation gap area is not identified on the chart
by distances from the navigation facilities. Proper flight
planning will help pilots prepare for MEA gaps by insuring
that appropriate maps are available as they may need
to dead reckon through the gap. Calculating the ground
track (with adjustments for winds) before and after the gap
will also help to stay on course when navigational course
guidance is not available.
NAVAID Accuracy Check
The CFRs and good judgment dictate that the equipment
of aircraft flying under IFR be within a specified tolerance
before taking off. When approved procedures are available,
they should be used for all equipment inspections.
VOR Accuracy
VOR accuracy can be checked by using any of the following
methods: VOR test facility signal (VOT), VOR checkpoint
signs, dual VOR check, or airborne VOR check.
VOT
The VOT is an approved test signal and is located on an
airport. This enables the pilot to check the VOR accuracy
from the flight deck before takeoff. Listed below are the
steps used for a VOT:
1. Tune the VOR receiver to the VOT frequency. VOT
frequencies can be found in the CS. [Figure 2-50]
These frequencies are coded with a series of Morse
code dots or a continuous 1020-cycle tone.

Sample: Enter with MEA of 13,000 feet. Read allowable gap 18.5 NM.
Allowable navigation course guidance gap (NM)
NOT FOR
NAVIGATION
MEA of airway or route segment (thousands of feet)
Figure 2-49. Navigational course guidance gaps.
VOR test facilities (VOT)
Facility Name ..............................
Type VOT
(Airport Name) ...........Frequency
Facility
Remarks
Bradlay Intl .................... 111.40
G
Bridgeport ..................... 109.25
G
Groton ........................... 110.25
G
Hartford ......................... 108.20
G
Figure 2-50. VOR test facilities (VOT) frequencies.
Figure 2-51. VOR checkpoint signs.
VOR 116.4
147° 4.1 NM
DME and VOR check radial
2. On the VOR, set the course selector to 0° and the
track bar (TB) indicator should read center. The TO­
FROM indicator should read FROM.
3. Set the course selector to 180° and the TO-FROM
indicator should read TO and the TB should then be
centered.
Note: Determining the exact error in the receiver is done
by turning the track selector until the TB is centered and
noting the degrees difference between 180° or 0°. The
maximum bearing error with the VOT system check is plus
or minus 4° and apparent errors greater than 4° indicate
that the VOR receiver is beyond acceptable tolerance.
VOR Checkpoint Signs
Many aerodromes have VOR checkpoint signs that are
located beside the taxiways. [Figure 2-51] These signs
indicate the exact point on the aerodrome that there is
sufficient signal strength from a VOR to check the aircraft’s

VOR receiver against the radial designated on the sign.
Listed below are the steps to use at a VOR checkpoint:
1.
Tune the proper VOR frequency.
2.
Identify the VOR frequency.
V
3.
Set the published radial on the course deviation
fl
indicator (CDI).
r
4.
Confirm that the TB is centered.
t
o
5.
Check the needle sensitivity by changing the
omnibearing select (OBS) 10° each way.
6.
Set the reciprocal of the radial and check the TO
T
FROM flag change.
n
7.
The maximum permissible difference between
f
aircraft equipment and the designated radial is 4°
i
and 0.5 NM of the posted distance.
s
­
Dual VOR Check
If a VOT or VOR checkpoint is not available and the aircraft is
equipped with dual VORs, the equipment may be checked
against one another by tuning both sets to the VOR facility
at the same time and noting the indicated bearings to that
station. [Figure 2-52] A difference greater than 4° between
the two VORs indicates that one of the receivers may be
out of tolerance.
Airborne VOR Check
OR equipment can also be checked for accuracy while in
ight by flying over a fix or landmark located on a published
adial and noting the indicated radial. Variances of more
han 6° from the published radial should be considered out
f tolerance and not be used for IFR navigation.
NDB Accuracy Check
he pilot must identify an NDB before using it for
avigation, and continuously monitor it while using it
or an instrument approach. The lack of an IDENT may
ndicate that the NDB is out of service, even though it may
till be transmitting (for instance for maintenance or test
purposes). If an incorrect IDENT is heard, then the NDB
should not be used.
RNAV Accuracy Check
RNAV accuracy checks may differ depending on the
different type of equipment and manufacturer. When
available, all written procedures should be followed.
Figure 2-52. Instrument panel with dual VORs.

Below is a list of generic checks that should be used when
checking the accuracy of the system prior to flight.
1. System initialization—pilots should confirm that
the navigation database is current and verify that the
aircrafts present position has been entered correctly.
2. Active flight plan check—the active flight plan
should be checked by comparing the aeronautical
charts, departure and arrival procedures, and other
applicable documents with the map display.
Figure 2-53. Fly-by and fly-over waypoints.
Fly-by waypoint
Fly-over waypoint
Alpha
Bravo
Bravo
Alpha
3. Prior to takeoff—ensure that the RNAV system is
available. If possible, check to see that the system
is updating when aircraft position is changing.
Note: While in flight, continue to verify system accuracy
by displaying bearing/range to a VOR/DME on the RNAV
system and compare it to the actual RMI reading of that
particular NAVAID.
Waypoints
Waypoints are predetermined geographical locations that
are defined in terms of latitude/longitude coordinates or
fixes, used to define an RNAV route or the flight path of
an aircraft employing RNAV. Waypoints may be a simple
named point in space or may be associated with existing
NAVAIDs, intersections, or fixes. A waypoint is most often
used to indicate a change in direction, speed, or altitude
along the desired path. Aviation RNAV procedures make
use of both fly-over and fly-by waypoints. A fly-over
waypoint is a waypoint that must be crossed vertically by
an aircraft. A fly-by waypoint is a waypoint that marks the
intersection of two straight paths, with the transition from
one path to another being made by the aircraft using a
precisely calculated turn that flies by but does not vertically
cross the waypoint. [Figure 2-53]
User-Defined Waypoints
Pilots typically create user-defined waypoints for use in
their own random RNAV direct navigation. They are newly
established, unpublished airspace fixes that are designated
geographic locations/positions that help provide positive
course guidance for navigation and a means of checking
progress on a flight. They may or may not be actually
plotted by the pilot on en route charts, but would normally
be communicated to ATC in terms of bearing and distance
or latitude/longitude. An example of user-defined
waypoints typically includes those generated by various
means including keyboard input, and even electronic map
mode functions used to establish waypoints with a cursor
on the display.
Another example is an offset phantom waypoint, which is
a point-in-space formed by a bearing and distance from
NAVAIDs, such as VORTACs and tactical air navigation
(TACAN) stations, using a variety of navigation systems.
When specifying unpublished waypoints in a flight plan,
they can be communicated using the frequency/bearing/
distance format or latitude and longitude, and they
automatically become compulsory reporting points unless
otherwise advised by ATC. All aircraft with latitude and
longitude navigation systems flying above FL 390 must use
latitude and longitude to define turning points.
Floating Waypoints
Floating waypoints, or reporting points, represent
airspace fixes at a point in space not directly associated
with a conventional airway. In many cases, they may be
established for such purposes as ATC metering fixes,
holding points, RNAV-direct routing, gateway waypoints,
STAR origination points leaving the en route structure,
and SID terminating points joining the en route structure.
In the top example of Figure 2-54, a low altitude en route
chart depicts three floating waypoints that have been
highlighted: SCORR, FILUP, and CHOOT. Notice that
waypoints are named with five-letter identifiers that are
unique and pronounceable. Pilots must be careful of
similar waypoint names. Notice on the high altitude en
route chart excerpt in the bottom example, the similar
sounding and spelled floating waypoint named SCOOR,
rather than SCORR. This emphasizes the importance
of correctly entering waypoints into database-driven
navigation systems. One waypoint character incorrectly
entered into your navigation system could adversely affect
your flight. The SCOOR floating reporting point also is

Figure 2-54. Floating waypoints.
depicted on a Severe Weather Avoidance Plan (SWAP) en
route chart. These waypoints and SWAP routes assist pilots
and controllers when severe weather affects the East Coast.
Computer Navigation Performance
An integral part of RNAV using en route charts typically
involves the use of airborne navigation databases.
Because GPS receivers are basically “to-to” navigators,
they must always be navigating to a defined point. On
overlay approaches, if no pronounceable five-character
name is published for an approach waypoint or fix, it has
been given a database identifier consisting of letters and
numbers. These points appear in the list of waypoints in the
approach procedure database, but may not appear on the
approach chart. A point used for the purpose of defining
the navigation track for an airborne computer system (i.e.,
GPS or FMS) is called a Computer Navigation Fix (CNF). CNFs
include unnamed DME fixes, beginning and ending points
of DME arcs, and sensor final approach fixes (FAFs) on some
GPS overlay approaches.
To aid in the approach chart/database correlation process,
the FAA has begun a program to assign five-letter names
to CNFs and to chart CNFs on various National Oceanic
Service aeronautical products. [Figure 2-55] These CNFs
are not to be used for any ATC application, such as holding
for which the fix has not already been assessed. CNFs are
charted to distinguish them from conventional reporting
points, fixes, intersections, and waypoints. A CNF name is
enclosed in parenthesis, e.g., (MABEE) and is placed next
to the CNF it defines. If the CNF is not at an existing point
defined by means such as crossing radials or radial/DME,
the point is indicated by an X. The CNF name is not used in
filing a flight plan or in aircraft/ATC communications. Use
current phraseology (e.g., facility name, radial, distance) to
describe these fixes.

NOT FOR NAVIGATION
Figure 2-55. Computer navigation fix.
Many of the RNAV systems available today make it all
too easy to forget that en route charts are still required
and necessary for flight. As important as databases are,
they really are onboard the aircraft to provide navigation
guidance and situational awareness (SA); they are not
intended as a substitute for paper charts. When flying
with GPS, FMS, or planning a flight with a computer, it is
critical to understand the limitations of the system you are
using, for example, incomplete information, unloadable
procedures, complex procedures, and database storage
limitations.
Required Navigation Performance
Required navigation performance (RNP) is RNAV with
onboard navigation monitoring and alerting. RNP is also
a statement of navigation performance necessary for
operation within a defined airspace. A critical component
of RNP is the ability of the aircraft navigation system to
monitor its achieved navigation performance, and to
identify for the pilot whether the operational requirement
is, or is not being met during an operation. This onboard
performance monitoring and alerting capability;
therefore, allows a lessened reliance on ATC intervention
(via radar monitoring, automatic dependent surveillance-
broadcast (ADS-B), multilateration, communications),
and/or route separation to achieve the overall safety of
the operation. RNP capability of the aircraft is a major
component in determining the separation criteria to
ensure that the overall containment of the operation is
met.
The RNP capability of an aircraft varies depending upon
the aircraft equipment and the navigation infrastructure.
For example, an aircraft may be equipped and certified
for RNP 1.0, but may not be capable of RNP 1.0 operations
due to limited NAVAID coverage.
0.1 to 1.0
0.3 to 1.0
RNP AR Approach Segments
RNP Approach Segments
Terminal and En Route
En Route
0.1 to 1.0
0.3 to 1.0
RNP Level
Typical Application
Primary Route Width (NM) - Centerline to Boundary
Figure 2-56. U.S. standard RNP levels.

RNP Levels
An RNP level or type is applicable to a selected airspace,
route, or procedure. As defined in the Pilot/Controller
Glossary, the RNP level or type is a value typically expressed
as a distance in nautical miles from the intended centerline
of a procedure, route, or path. RNP applications also
account for potential errors at some multiple of RNP level
(e.g., twice the RNP level).
Standard RNP Levels
United States standard values supporting typical RNP
airspace are shown in Figure 2-56. Other RNP levels as
identified by ICAO, other states, and the FAA may also be
used.
Application of Standard RNP Levels
United States standard levels of RNP typically used for
various routes and procedures supporting RNAV operations
may be based on use of a specific navigational system
or sensor, such as GPS, or on multi-sensor RNAV systems
having suitable performance.
Note: The performance of navigation in RNP refers not only
to the level of accuracy of a particular sensor or aircraft
navigation system, but also to the degree of precision
with which the aircraft is flown. Specific required flight
procedures may vary for different RNP levels.
IFR En Route Altitudes
Minimum En Route Altitudes (MEAs), Minimum Reception
Altitudes (MRAs), Maximum Authorized Altitudes (MAAs),
Minimum Obstacle Clearance Altitudes (MOCAs), Minimum
Turning Altitudes (MTAs) and Minimum Crossing Altitudes
(MCAs) are established by the FAA for instrument flight
along Federal airways, as well as some off-airway routes.
The altitudes are established after it has been determined
that the NAVAIDs to be used are adequate and so oriented
on the airways or routes that signal coverage is acceptable,
and that flight can be maintained within prescribed route
widths.
For IFR operations, regulations require that pilots operate
their aircraft at or above minimum altitudes. Except when
necessary for takeoff or landing, pilots may not operate an
aircraft under IFR below applicable minimum altitudes, or
if no applicable minimum altitude is prescribed, in the case
of operations over an area designated as mountainous, an
altitude of 2,000 feet above the highest obstacle within a
horizontal distance of 4 NM from the course to be flown. In
any other case, an altitude of 1,000 feet above the highest
obstacle within a horizontal distance of 4 NM from the
course to be flown must be maintained as a minimum
altitude. If both a MEA and a MOCA are prescribed for a
particular route or route segment, pilots may operate an
aircraft below the MEA down to, but not below, the MOCA,
only when within 22 NM of the VOR. When climbing to
a higher minimum IFR altitude (MIA), pilots must begin
climbing immediately after passing the point beyond
which that minimum altitude applies, except when ground
obstructions intervene, the point beyond which that higher
minimum altitude applies must be crossed at or above the
applicable MCA for the VOR.
If on an IFR flight plan, but cleared by ATC to maintain VFR
conditions on top, pilots may not fly below minimum en
route IFR altitudes. Minimum altitude rules are designed to
ensure safe vertical separation between the aircraft and the
terrain. These minimum altitude rules apply to all IFR flights,
whether in IFR or VFR weather conditions, and whether
assigned a specific altitude or VFR conditions on top.
Minimum En Route Altitude (MEA)
The MEA is the lowest published altitude between radio
fixes that assures acceptable navigational signal coverage
and meets obstacle clearance requirements between those
fixes. The MEA prescribed for a Federal airway or segment,
RNAV low or high route, or other direct route applies to the
entire width of the airway, segment, or route between the
radio fixes defining the airway, segment, or route. MEAs
for routes wholly contained within controlled airspace
normally provide a buffer above the floor of controlled
airspace consisting of at least 300 feet within transition
areas and 500 feet within control areas. MEAs are established
based upon obstacle clearance over terrain and manmade
objects, adequacy of navigation facility performance, and
communications requirements.
RNAV Minimum En Route Altitude
RNAV MEAs are depicted on some IFR en route low altitude
charts, allowing both RNAV and non-RNAV pilots to use the
same chart for instrument navigation.
Minimum Reception Altitude (MRA)
MRAs are determined by FAA flight inspection traversing
an entire route of flight to establish the minimum altitude
the navigation signal can be received for the route and for
off-course NAVAID facilities that determine a fix. When the
MRA at the fix is higher than the MEA, an MRA is established
for the fix and is the lowest altitude at which an intersection
can be determined.
Maximum Authorized Altitude (MAA)
An MAA is a published altitude representing the maximum
usable altitude or flight level for an airspace structure

Figure 2-57. Maximum authorized altitude (MAA).
Figure 2-58. Minimum obstacle clearance altitude (MOCA).
Minimum obstacle clearance altitude
or route segment. [Figure 2-57] It is the highest altitude
on a Federal airway, jet route, RNAV low or high route,
or other direct route for which an MEA is designated at
which adequate reception of navigation signals is assured.
MAAs represent procedural limits determined by technical
limitations or other factors, such as limited airspace or
frequency interference of ground-based facilities.
Minimum Obstruction Clearance Altitude
(MOCA)
The MOCA is the lowest published altitude in effect between
fixes on VOR airways, off-airway routes, or route segments
that meets obstacle clearance requirements for the entire
route segment. [Figure 2-58] This altitude also assures
acceptable navigational signal coverage only within 22 NM
of a VOR. The MOCA seen on the en route chart may have
been computed by adding the required obstacle clearance
(ROC) to the controlling obstacle in the primary area or
computed by using a TERPS chart if the controlling obstacle
is located in the secondary area. This figure is then rounded
to the nearest 100 foot increment (i.e., 2,049 feet becomes
2,000, and 2,050 feet becomes 2,100 feet). An extra 1,000

MTA
V330 E to V520 W 16000
V465 NE to 330 W or V520 W 16000
Figure 2-59. Minimum turning altitude (MTA).
Centerline
3.6°
4.5°
Fix displacement area
En route facility
Facility providing intersection radial
Primary area
Secondary area
Figure 2-60. Turning area at the intersection fix with NAVAID distance less than 51 NM.

feet is added in mountainous areas, in most cases.
ATC controllers have an important role in helping pilots
remain clear of obstructions. Controllers are instructed to
issue a safety alert if the aircraft is in a position that, in their
judgment, places the pilot in unsafe proximity to terrain,
obstructions, or other aircraft. Once pilots inform ATC of
action being taken to resolve the situation, the controller
may discontinue the issuance of further alerts. A typical
terrain/obstruction alert may sound like this: “(Aircraft call
sign ), Low altitude alert. Check your altitude immediately.
The MOCA in your area is 12,000.”
Minimum Turning Altitude (MTA)
Minimum turning altitude (MTA) is a charted altitude
providing vertical and lateral obstruction clearance based
on turn criteria over certain fixes, NAVAIDs, waypoints,
and on charted route segments. [Figure 2-59] When a
VHF airway or route terminates at a NAVAID or fix, the
primary area extends beyond that termination point.
When a change of course on VHF airways and routes is
necessary, the en route obstacle clearance turning area
extends the primary and secondary obstacle clearance
areas to accommodate the turn radius of the aircraft. Since
turns at or after fix passage may exceed airway and route
boundaries, pilots are expected to adhere to airway and
route protected airspace by leading turns early before a
fix. The turn area provides obstacle clearance for both turn
anticipation (turning prior to the fix) and flyover protection
(turning after crossing the fix). This does not violate the
requirement to fly the centerline of the airway. Many factors
enter into the construction and application of the turning
area to provide pilots with adequate obstacle clearance
protection. These may include aircraft speed, the amount
of turn versus NAVAID distance, flight track, curve radii,
MEAs, and MTA. [Figure 2-60]
Due to increased airspeeds at 10,000 feet MSL or above, an
expanded area in the vicinity of the turning fix is examined
to ensure the published MEA is sufficient for obstacle
clearance. In some locations (normally mountainous),
terrain/obstacles in the expanded search area may obviate
the published MEA and necessitate a higher minimum
altitude while conducting the turning maneuver. Turning
fixes requiring a higher MTA are charted with a flag along
with accompanying text describing the MTA restriction.
[Figure 2-59]
An MTA restriction normally consists of the ATS route
leading to the turning fix, the ATS route leading from the
turning fix, and an altitude (e.g., MTA V330 E TO V520
W 16000). When an MTA is applicable for the intended
route of flight, pilots must ensure they are at or above the
charted MTA prior to beginning the turn and maintain at
Airway
number
or route
*9500E
# MTA
* 13400W
300 MTN ROC RED
DEL MCA ATIDA
COME ADD MCA
AT OSITY DEC MOCA
INC MCA PRECIP
TER DEC MOCA
MEA CARDINAL ALT
JAC R-251 UNUSABLE
BYD 10 # CHART:
MTA V330 E TO
DEL directional MEA
MEA CARONIAL ALT
Date
Office
Title
Signature
From
To
Idaho Falls, ID VOR/DME
*Osity, ID
Osity, ID
# Jackson, WY VOR/DME
Routine
or docket
number
GNSS
MEA
Change
over point
Fix
MRA/MCA
Remarks
Flight
inspection
dates
Controlling @
terrain/Obstruction
and coordinates
Tree 6177 @
432912.00N/1114118.00W
432912.00N/1114118.00W
AAO 12138 (SEC) @
434118.30N/1104858.30W
433900.00N/1105057.00W
MRA
MOCA
MAA
MEA
--7900-­
--13600-­
Transmittal of Airways/Route Data
Manager
Ray Nussear
Figure 2-61. Minimum turning altitude information located in the remarks section of FAA Form 8260-16 Transmittal of Airways/Route Data.

Figure 2-62. Minimum crossing altitude (MCA).
or above the MTA until joining the centerline of the ATS
route following the turn. Once established on the centerline
following the turning fix, the MEA/MOCA determines the
minimum altitude available for assignment.
An MTA may also preclude the use of a specific altitude or
a range of altitudes during a turn. For example, the MTA
may restrict the use of 10,000 through 11,000 feet MSL.
In this case, any altitude greater than 11,000 feet MSL is
unrestricted, as are altitudes less than 10,000 feet MSL
provided MEA/MOCA requirements are satisfied.
All MTA information associated with the airway/route
inbound to the turn fix/facility is put in the remarks section
of FAA Form 8260-16, Transmittal of Airways/Route Data,
using the following format [Figure 2-61]:
#CHART: MTA V330 E TO V520 W 16000
(Document on V330 FAA Form 8260-16)
#CHART: MTA V465 NE TO V330 W OR V520 W 16000
(Document on V465 FAA Form 8260-16)
When an MTA is required by FAA Order 8260.3, paragraph
15-1-5c, enter the MTA information in the REMARKS section
of FAA Form 8260-2, Radio Fix and Holding Data Record, as
specified on the appropriate FAA Form 8260-16, Transmittal
of Airways/Route Data, using the following format:
MTA: V330 E TO V520 W 16000
700'
3200'
2000'
6 NM
4620' MSL
120' per NM required
Multiply by 6 NM −720 feet
Maximum Displacement
MSL
X
MEA 5200'
MCA 5900' E
Obstruction height
4,620'
Required clearance
+2000'
MOCA at obstruction
=6,620'
Climb value*
−720'
MCA required
=5,900'
* Based upon 6 NM @ 120 feet per NM
Obstacle Line
2000'
Figure 2-63. Minimum crossing altitude (MCA) determination point.

MTA: V465 NE TO V330 W OR V520 W 16000
Minimum Crossing Altitude (MCA)
An MCA is the lowest altitude at certain fixes at which the
aircraft must cross when proceeding in the direction of a
higher minimum en route IFR altitude. [Figure 2-62] When
applicable, MCAs are depicted on the en route chart. [Figure
2-59] MCAs are established in all cases where obstacles
intervene to prevent pilots from maintaining obstacle
clearance during a normal climb to a higher MEA after
passing a point beyond which the higher MEA applies. The
same protected en route area vertical obstacle clearance
requirements for the primary and secondary areas are
considered in the determination of the MCA. The standard
for determining the MCA is based upon the following climb
gradients and is computed from the flight altitude:
Sea level through 5,000 feet MSL—150 feet per NM
5000 feet through 10,000 feet MSL—120 feet per
NM
10,000 feet MSL and over—100 feet per NM
To determine the MCA seen on an en route chart, the
distance from the obstacle to the fix is computed from
the point where the centerline of the en route course in
the direction of flight intersects the farthest displacement
from the fix. [Figure 2-63] When a change of altitude is
involved with a course change, course guidance must be
provided if the change of altitude is more than 1,500 feet
and/or if the course change is more than 45°, although
there is an exception to this rule. In some cases, course
changes of up to 90° may be approved without course
guidance provided that no obstacles penetrate the
established MEA requirement of the previous airway or
route segment. Outside United States airspace, pilots may
encounter different flight procedures regarding MCA and
transitioning from one MEA to a higher MEA. In this case,
pilots are expected to be at the higher MEA crossing the
fix, similar to an MCA. Pilots must thoroughly review flight
procedure differences when flying outside United States
airspace. On IFR en route low altitude charts, routes and
associated data outside the conterminous United States
are shown for transitional purposes only and are not part
of the high altitude jet route and RNAV route systems.
[Figure 2-64]
Minimum IFR Altitude (MIA)
The MIA for operations is prescribed in 14 CFR Part 91. These
MIAs are published on aeronautical charts and prescribed
in 14 CFR Part 95 for airways and routes, and in
14 CFR Part 97 for standard instrument approach
procedures. If no applicable minimum altitude is prescribed
NOT FOR NAVIGATION
IN CANADA CROSS EACH FIX AT OR
ABOVE THE HIGHER MINIMUM EN ROUTE
IFR ALTITUDE APPLICABLE TO FLIGHT.
Figure 2-64. En route chart minimum crossing altitude data (outside of the U.S.).

SAMPLE NOT
FOR ACTUAL USE
Figure 2-65. MVA chart.
in 14 CFR Parts 95 or 97, the following MIA applies: In
designated mountainous areas, 2,000 feet above the
highest obstacle within a horizontal distance of 4 NM
from the course to be flown; or other than mountainous
areas, 1,000 feet above the highest obstacle within a
horizontal distance of 4 NM from the course to be flown; or
as otherwise authorized by the Administrator or assigned
by ATC. MIAs are not flight checked for communication.
Minimum Vectoring Altitudes (MVA)
MVAs are established for use by ATC when radar ATC is
exercised. The MVA provides 1,000 feet of clearance above
the highest obstacle in non-mountainous areas and 2,000
10,000
RIW
15,800
14,500
12,000
13,700
10,700
11,000
12,400
12,000
15,500
14,200
11,000
13,800
13,300
12,300
14,500
CKW
VEL
FBR
RKS
feet above the highest obstacle in designated mountainous
areas. Because of the ability to isolate specific obstacles,
some MVAs may be lower than MEAs, MOCAs, or other
minimum altitudes depicted on charts for a given location.
While being radar vectored, IFR altitude assignments by
ATC are normally at or above the MVA.
Air traffic controllers use MVAs only when they are assured
an adequate radar return is being received from the aircraft.
Charts depicting MVAs are available to controllers and have
recently become available to pilots. They can be found
at http://www.faa.gov/air_traffic/flight_info/aeronav/
digital_products/mva_mia/ Situational Awareness is

IFR
EVEN
2,000'
Intervals
begin at
18,000' MSL
VFR or
VFR-ON-TOP
EVEN
2,000'
Intervals
begin at
IFR
ODD
2,000'
Intervals
begin at
VFR or
VFR-ON-TOP
ODD
2,000'
Intervals
begin at
°
M
°
°
°
M
18,000' MSL to flight level 290
IFR
EVEN
4,000'
Intervals
begin at
VFR or
VFR-ON-TOP
4,000'
Intervals
begin at
IFR
4,000'
Intervals
begin at
VFR or
VFR-ON-TOP
4,000'
Intervals
begin at
°
M
°
°
°
M
Flight level 290 and above
IFR
EVEN
thousands
VFR or
ON-TOP
EVEN
thousands
plus
500'
IFR
ODD
thousands
VFR or
ON-TOP
ODD
thousands
plus
500'
°
M
°
°
°
M
Cruising altitudes - U.S.
IFR within controlled airspace as assigned by ATC
For additional symbol information
refer to the chart user’s guide.
VFR above 3000' AGL unless otherwise
authorized by ATC IFR outside controlled
airspace all courses are magnetic
NO VFR FLIGHTS WITHIN
CLASS A AIRSPACE
CRUISING ALTITUDES
IFR within controlled airspace as assigned by ATC
VFR above 3,000' AGL unless otherwise
authorized by ATC IFR outside controlled
airspace all courses are magnetic
Figure 2-66. Cruising altitude or flight level.
always important, especially when being radar vectored
during a climb into an area with progressively higher MVA
sectors, similar to the concept of MCA. Except where diverse
vector areas have been established, when climbing, pilots
should not be vectored into a sector with a higher MVA
unless at or above the next sector’s MVA. Where lower
MVAs are required in designated mountainous areas to
achieve compatibility with terminal routes or to permit
vectoring to an instrument approach procedure, 1,000 feet
of obstacle clearance may be authorized with the use of
Airport Surveillance Radar (ASR). The MVA provides at least
300 feet above the floor of controlled airspace. The MVA
charts are developed to the maximum radar range. Sectors
provide separation from terrain and obstructions. Each MVA
chart has sectors large enough to accommodate vectoring
of aircraft within the sector at the MVA. [Figure 2-65]
IFR Cruising Altitude or Flight Level
In controlled airspace, pilots must maintain the altitude or
flight level assigned by ATC, although if the ATC clearance
assigns “VFR conditions on-top,” an altitude or flight level as
prescribed by 14 CFR Part 91, § 91.159 must be maintained.
In uncontrolled airspace (except while in a holding pattern
of two minutes or less or while turning) if operating an
aircraft under IFR in level cruising flight, an appropriate
altitude as depicted in the legend of IFR en route high
and low altitude charts must be maintained. [Figure 2-66]
When operating on an IFR flight plan below 18,000 feet
MSL in accordance with a VFR-on-top clearance, any VFR
cruising altitude appropriate to the direction of flight
between the MEA and 18,000 feet MSL may be selected that
allows the flight to remain in VFR conditions. Any change in
altitude must be reported to ATC, and pilots must comply
with all other IFR reporting procedures. VFR-on-top is not
authorized in Class A airspace. When cruising below 18,000
feet MSL, the altimeter must be adjusted to the current
setting, as reported by a station within 100 NM of your
position. In areas where weather-reporting stations are
more than 100 NM from the route, the altimeter setting of
a station that is closest may be used.
During IFR flight, ATC advises flights periodically of the
current altimeter setting, but it remains the responsibility
of the pilot or flight crew to update altimeter settings in a
timely manner. Altimeter settings and weather information

are available from weather reporting facilities operated or
approved by the U.S. National Weather Service, or a source
approved by the FAA. Some commercial operators have
the authority to act as a government-approved source of
weather information, including altimeter settings, through
certification under the FAA’s Enhanced Weather Information
System.
Flight level operations at or above 18,000 feet MSL require
the altimeter to be set to 29.92 inches of mercury (" Hg). A
flight level (FL) is defined as a level of constant atmospheric
pressure related to a reference datum of 29.92 " Hg. Each
flight level is stated in three digits that represent hundreds of
feet. For example, FL 250 represents an altimeter indication
of 25,000 feet. Conflicts with traffic operating below 18,000
feet MSL may arise when actual altimeter settings along the
route of flight are lower than 29.92 " Hg. Therefore, 14 CFR
Part 91, § 91.121 specifies the lowest usable flight levels for
a given altimeter setting range.
Reduced Vertical Separation Minimums (RSVM)
Reduced vertical separation minimums (RVSM) is a term
used to describe the reduction of the standard vertical
separation required between aircraft flying at levels
between FL 290 (29,000 feet) and FL 410 (41,000 feet)
from 2,000 feet to 1,000 feet. The purpose; therefore,
increases the number of aircraft that can safely fly in a
particular volume of airspace. Historically, standard vertical
separation was 1,000 feet from the surface to FL 290, 2,000
feet from FL 290 to FL 410 and 4,000 feet above this. This
was because the accuracy of the pressure altimeter (used
to determine altitude) decreases with height. Over time,
air data computers (ADCs) combined with altimeters have
become more accurate and autopilots more adept at
maintaining a set level; therefore, it became apparent that
for many modern aircraft, the 2,000-foot separation was not
required . It was, therefore, proposed by ICAO that this be
reduced to 1,000 feet.
Between 1997 and 2005, RVSM was implemented in all of
Europe, North Africa, Southeast Asia, North America, South
America, and over the North Atlantic, South Atlantic, and
Pacific Oceans. The North Atlantic implemented initially in
March 1997, at FL 330 through FL 370. The entire western
hemisphere implemented RVSM FL 290–FL 410 on January
20, 2005.
Only aircraft with specially certified altimeters and
autopilots may fly in RVSM airspace, otherwise the aircraft
must fly lower or higher than the airspace, or seek special
exemption from the requirements. Additionally, aircraft
operators (airlines or corporate operators) must receive
specific approval from the aircraft’s state of registry in
order to conduct operations in RVSM airspace. Non-RVSM
approved aircraft may transit through RVSM airspace
provided they are given continuous climb throughout the
designated airspace, and 2,000 feet vertical separation is
provided at all times between the non-RVSM flight and all
others for the duration of the climb/descent.
Critics of the change were concerned that by reducing
the space between aircraft, RVSM may increase the
number of mid-air collisions and conflicts. In the ten
years since RVSM was first implemented, not one
collision has been attributed to RVSM. In the United
States, this program was known as the Domestic
Reduced Vertical Separation Minimum (DRVSM).
Cruise Clearance
The term “cruise” may be used instead of “maintain” to
assign a block of airspace to an aircraft. The block extends
from the minimum IFR altitude up to and including the
altitude that is specified in the cruise clearance. On a cruise
clearance, you may level off at any intermediate altitude
within this block of airspace. You are allowed to climb or
descend within the block at your own discretion. However,
once you start descent and verbally report leaving an
altitude in the block to ATC, you may not return to that
altitude without an additional ATC clearance. A cruise
clearance also authorizes you to execute an approach at
the destination airport.
Lowest Usable Flight Level
When the barometric pressure is 31.00 " Hg or less and
pilots are flying below 18,000 feet MSL, use the current
reported altimeter setting. When an aircraft is en route
on an instrument flight plan, air traffic controllers furnish
this information at least once while the aircraft is in the
controller’s area of jurisdiction. When the barometric
pressure exceeds 31.00 " Hg, the following procedures are
placed in effect by NOTAM defining the geographic area
affected: Set 31.00 " Hg for en route operations below
18,000 feet MSL and maintain this setting until beyond
the affected area. ATC issues actual altimeter settings and
advises pilots to set 31.00 " Hg in their altimeter, for en route
operations below 18,000 feet MSL in affected areas. If an
aircraft has the capability of setting the current altimeter
setting and operating into airports with the capability of
measuring the current altimeter setting, no additional
restrictions apply. At or above 18,000 feet MSL, altimeters
should be set to 29.92 " Hg (standard setting). Additional
procedures exist beyond the en route phase of flight.
The lowest usable flight level is determined by the
atmospheric pressure in the area of operation. As local
altimeter settings fall below 29.92 " Hg, pilots operating
in Class A airspace must cruise at progressively higher
indicated altitudes to ensure separation from aircraft

FAA AIR SERVICE OUTSIDE U.S. AIRSPACE
IS PROVIDED IN ACCORDANCE WITH
ARTICLE 12 AND ANNEX 11 OF ICAO
CONVENTION. ICAO CONVENTION NOT
APPLICABLE TO STATE AIRCRAFT BUT
COMPLIANCE WITH ICAO STANDARDS
AND PRACTICES IS ENCOURAGED.
NOT FOR NAVIGATION
MONCTON FIR
CZQM
ALTIMETER
QNH
QNE
CRABB
N42°13.00´
W65°44.00´
Figure 2-67. Altimeter setting changes.
operating in the low altitude structure as follows:
Current Altimeter Setting
Lowest Usable Flight Level
29.92 or higher
29.91 to 29.42
29.41 to 28.92
28.91 to 28.42
28.41 to 27.91
When the minimum altitude, as prescribed in 14 CFR Part
91, § 91.159 and 91.177, is above 18,000 feet MSL, the
lowest usable flight level is the flight level equivalent of
the minimum altitude plus the number of feet specified
according to the lowest flight level correction factor as
follows:
Altimeter Setting
Correction Factor
29.92 or higher
—
29.91 to 29.42
500 feet
Altimeter Setting
Correction Factor
29.41 to 28.92
1,000 feet
28.91 to 28.42
1,500 feet
28.41 to 27.91
2,000 feet
27.91 to 27.42
2,500 feet
Operations in Other Countries
When flight crews transition from the U.S. NAS to another
country’s airspace, they should be aware of differences not
only in procedures but also airspace. For example, when
flying into Canada as depicted in Figure 2-67, notice the
change from transition level (QNE) to transition altitude
(QNH) when flying north-bound into the Moncton flight
information region (FIR).
Operations in international airspace demand that pilots
are aware of, and understand the use of, the three types
of altimeter settings. Most overseas airports give altimeter

RADAR/NON-RADAR REPORTS
These reports should be made at all times without a specific ATC request.
Leaving one assigned flight altitude or flight level for another
VFR-on-top change in altitude
Leaving any assigned holding fix or point
Missed approach
Unable to climb or descend at least 500 fpm
TAS variation from filed speed of 5% or 10 knots, whichever
is greater
Time and altitude or flight level upon reaching a holding fix
or clearance limit
Loss of Nav/Comm capability (required by Part 91.187)
Unforecast weather conditions or other information relating
to the safety of flight (required by Part 91.183)
"Marathon 564, leaving 8,000, climb to 10,000."
"Marathon 564, VFR-on-top, climbing to 10,500."
"Marathon 564, leaving FARGO Intersection."
"Marathon 564, missed approach, request clearance to Chicago."
"Marathon 564, maximum climb rate 400 feet per minute."
"Marathon 564, advises TAS decrease to140 knots."
"Marathon 564, FARGO Intersection at 05, 10,000, holding east."
"Marathon 564, ILS receiver inoperative."
"Marathon 564, experiencing moderate turbulence at 10,000."
NON-RADAR REPORTS
When you are not in radar contact, these reports should be made without a specific request from ATC.
Leaving FAF or OM inbound on final approach
Revised ETA of more than three minutes
"Marathon 564, outer marker inbound, leaving 2,000."
"Marathon 564, revising SCURRY estimate to 55."
REPORTS
EXAMPLE
REPORTS
EXAMPLE
Figure 2-68. ATC reporting procedures.
settings in hectopascals (hPa) (millibars). Therefore, it is
imperative that pilots or on-board equipment are able
to accurately convert inches of mercury to hPa, or hPa to
inches of mercury.
Altitude Above Ground (QFE)
A local altimeter setting equivalent to the barometric
pressure measured at an airport altimeter datum, usually
signifying the approach end of the runway is in use. At the
airport altimeter datum, an altimeter set to QFE indicates
zero altitude. If required to use QFE altimetry, altimeters
are set to QFE while operating at or below the transition
altitude and below the transition level. On the airport, the
altimeter will read “0” feet.
Barometric Pressure for Standard Altimeter
Setting (QNE)
Use the altimeter setting (en route) at or above the
transition altitude (FL 180 in the United States). The
altimeter setting is always 29.92 inches of mercury/1013.2
hPa for a QNE altitude. Transition levels differ from country
to country and pilots should be particularly alert when
making a climb or descent in a foreign area.
Barometric Pressure for Local Altimeter Setting
(QNH)
A local altimeter setting equivalent to the barometric
pressure measured at an airport altimeter datum and
corrected to sea level pressure. At the airport altimeter
datum, an altimeter set to QNH indicates airport elevation
above mean sea level (MSL). Altimeters are set to QNH
while operating at and below the transition altitude and
below the transition level.
For flights in the vicinity of airports, express the vertical
position of aircraft in terms of QNH or QFE at or below the
transition altitude and in terms of QNE at or above the
transition level. While passing through the transition layer,
express vertical position in terms of FLs when ascending
and in terms of altitudes when descending.
When an aircraft that receives a clearance as number one
to land completes its approach using QFE, express the
vertical position of the aircraft in terms of height above
the airport elevation during that portion of its flight for
which you may use QFE.
It is important to remember that most pressure altimeters
are subject to mechanical, elastic, temperature, and
installation errors. In addition, extremely cold temperature
differences may also require altimeter correction factors
as appropriate.

En Route Reporting Procedures
In addition to acknowledging a handoff to another Center
en route controller, there are reports that should be made
without a specific request from ATC. Certain reports should
be made at all times regardless of whether a flight is in radar
contact with ATC, while others are necessary only if radar
contact has been lost or terminated. [Figure 2-68]
Non-Radar Position Reports
If radar contact has been lost or radar service terminated,
the CFRs require pilots to provide ATC with position reports
over designated VORs and intersections along their route
of flight. These compulsory reporting points are depicted
on IFR en route charts by solid triangles. Position reports
over fixes indicated by open triangles are noncompulsory
reporting points and are only necessary when requested by
ATC. If on a direct course that is not on an established airway,
report over the fixes used in the flight plan that define
the route, since they automatically become compulsory
reporting points. Compulsory reporting points also apply
when conducting an IFR flight in accordance with a VFR-
on-top clearance.
Whether a route is on an airway or direct, position reports
are mandatory in a non-radar environment, and they
must include specific information. A typical position
report includes information pertaining to aircraft position,
expected route, and ETA. When a position report is to be
made passing a VOR radio facility, the time reported should
be the time at which the first complete reversal of the TO/
FROM indicator is accomplished. When a position report is
made passing a facility by means of an airborne ADF, the
time reported should be the time at which the indicator
makes a complete reversal. When an aural or a light panel
indication is used to determine the time passing a reporting
point, such as a fan marker, Z marker, cone of silence or
intersection of range courses, the time should be noted
when the signal is first received and again when it ceases.
The mean of these two times should then be taken as the
actual time over the fix. If a position is given with respect to
distance and direction from a reporting point, the distance
and direction should be computed as accurately as possible.
Except for terminal area transition purposes, position
reports or navigation with reference to aids not established
for use in the structure in which flight is being conducted
are not normally required by ATC.
Flights in a Radar Environment
When informed by ATC that their aircraft are in “Radar
Contact,” pilots should discontinue position reports over
designated reporting points. They should resume normal
position reporting when ATC advises “radar contact lost”
or “radar service terminated.” ATC informs pilots that they
are in radar contact:
1. When their aircraft is initially identified in the
ATC system; and
2. When radar identification is reestablished after
radar service has been terminated or radar
contact lost.
Subsequent to being advised that the controller has
established radar contact, this fact is not repeated to
the pilot when handed off to another controller. At
times, the aircraft identity is confirmed by the receiving
controller; however, this should not be construed to
mean that radar contact has been lost. The identity of
transponder equipped aircraft is confirmed by asking
the pilot to “ident,” “squawk standby,” or to change
codes. Aircraft without transponders are advised of
their position to confirm identity. In this case, the pilot
is expected to advise the controller if in disagreement
with the position given. Any pilot who cannot confirm
the accuracy of the position given because of not being
tuned to the NAVAID referenced by the controller
should ask for another radar position relative to the
tuned in NAVAID.
Position Report Items
Position reports should include the following items:
1. Aircraft identification
2.
Position
3.
Time
4. Altitude or flight level (include actual altitude
or flight level when operating on a clearance
specifying VFR-on-top)
5. Type of flight plan (not required in IFR position
reports made directly to ARTCCs or approach
control)
6. ETA and name of next reporting point
7. The name only of the next succeeding reporting
point along the route of flight
8. Pertinent remarks
Additional Reports
The following reports should be made at all times to
ATC or Flight Service facilities without a specific ATC
request:
1. When vacating any previously assigned altitude
or flight level for a newly assigned altitude or
flight level.
2. When an altitude change is made if operating
on a clearance specifying VFR-on-top.

3. When unable to climb/descend at a rate of a least
500 feet per minute (fpm).
4. When approach has been missed. (Request clearance
for specific action (i.e., to alternative airport, another
approach).
5. Change in the average true airspeed (at cruising
altitude) when it varies by 5 percent or 10 knots
(whichever is greater) from that filed in the flight
plan.
6. The time and altitude or flight level upon reaching
a holding fix or point to which cleared.
7. When leaving any assigned holding fix or point.
Note: The reports stated in subparagraphs 6 and
7 may be omitted by pilots of aircraft involved in
instrument training at military terminal area facilities
when radar service is being provided.
8. Any loss, in controlled airspace, of VOR, TACAN,
ADF, low frequency navigation receiver capability,
GPS anomalies while using installed IFR-certified
GPS/GNSS receivers, complete or partial loss of ILS
receiver capability or impairment of air/ground
communications capability. Reports should include
aircraft identification, equipment affected, degree
to which the capability to operate under IFR in the
ATC system is impaired, and the nature and extent
of assistance desired from ATC.
9. Any information relating to the safety of flight.
Other equipment installed in an aircraft may impair your
ability to safely operate under IFR. If a malfunction of
such equipment (e.g., weather radar) affects any safety or
IFR capability, reports should be made as stated above.
When reporting GPS anomalies, be very specific and
include the location, altitude, and duration of the anomaly.
Deliberate GPS interference or outage areas resulting from
pre-approved government tests will be disseminated in
NOTAMs. These outages should not be reported to ATC,
as this condition is known and not an anomaly. See also
AIM 1-1-13.
Communication Failure
Two-way radio communication failure procedures for IFR
operations are outlined in 14 CFR Part 91, § 91.185. Unless
otherwise authorized by ATC, pilots operating under IFR
are expected to comply with this regulation. Expanded
procedures for communication failures are found in the
Aeronautical Information Manual (AIM). Pilots can use the
transponder to alert ATC to a radio communication failure by
squawking code 7600. [Figure 2-69] If only the transmitter
is inoperative, listen for ATC instructions on any operational
receiver, including the navigation receivers. It is possible ATC
may try to make contact with pilots over a VOR, VORTAC,
NDB, or localizer frequency. In addition to monitoring
NAVAID receivers, attempt to reestablish communications
by contacting ATC on a previously assigned frequency or
calling an FSS.
The primary objective of the regulations governing
communication failures is to preclude extended IFR
no-radio operations within the ATC system since these
operations may adversely affect other users of the airspace.
If the radio fails while operating on an IFR clearance, but
in VFR conditions, or if encountering VFR conditions at
any time after the failure, continue the flight under VFR
conditions, if possible, and land as soon as practicable. The
requirement to land as soon as practicable should not be
construed to mean as soon as possible. Pilots retain the
prerogative of exercising their best judgment and are not
required to land at an unauthorized airport, at an airport
unsuitable for the type of aircraft flown, or to land only
When an aircraft squawks code 7600 during a two-way radio
communication failure, the information block on the radar
screen flashes RDOF (radio failure) to alert the controller.
Figure 2-69. Two-way radio communications failure transponder code.
minutes short of their intended destination. However, if
IFR conditions prevail, pilots must comply with procedures
designated in the CFRs to ensure aircraft separation.
If pilots must continue their flight under IFR after
experiencing two-way radio communication failure, they
should fly one of the following routes:
The route assigned by ATC in the last clearance
received.
If being radar vectored, the direct route from the
point of radio failure to the fix, route, or airway
specified in the radar vector clearance.
In the absence of an assigned route, the route ATC
has advised to expect in a further clearance.
In the absence of an assigned or expected route, the
route filed in the flight plan.

It is also important to fly a specific altitude should two-way
radio communications be lost. The altitude to fly after a
communication failure can be found in 14 CFR Part 91, §
91.185 and must be the highest of the following altitudes
for each route segment flown.
The altitude or flight level assigned in the last ATC
clearance.
The minimum altitude or flight level for IFR
operations.
The altitude or flight level ATC has advised to expect
in a further clearance.
In some cases, the assigned or expected altitude may not be as
high as the MEA on the next route segment. In this situation,
pilots normally begin a climb to the higher MEA when they
reach the fix where the MEA rises. If the fix also has a published
MCA, they start the climb so they are at or above the MCA
when reaching the fix. If the next succeeding route segment
has a lower MEA, descend to the applicable altitude either
the last assigned altitude or the altitude expected in a further
clearance—when reaching the fix where the MEA decreases.
ARTCC Radio Frequency Outage
ARTCCs normally have at least one back-up radio receiver
and transmitter system for each frequency that can usually
be placed into service quickly with little or no disruption of
ATC service. Occasionally, technical problems may cause a
delay but switchover seldom takes more than 60 seconds.
When it appears that the outage is not quickly remedied,
the ARTCC usually requests a nearby aircraft, if there is
one, to switch to the affected frequency to broadcast
communications instructions. It is important that the pilot
wait at least one minute before deciding that the ARTCC has
actually experienced a radio frequency failure. When such
an outage does occur, the pilot should, if workload and
equipment capability permit, maintain a listening watch
on the affected frequency while attempting to comply with
the following recommended communications procedures:
1. If two-way communications cannot be established
with the ARTCC after changing frequencies, a pilot
should attempt to re-contact the transferring
controller for the assignment of an alternative
frequency or other instructions.
2. When an ARTCC radio frequency failure occurs after
two-way communications have been established,
the pilot should attempt to reestablish contact with
the center on any other known ARTCC frequency,
preferably that of the next responsible sector when
practicable, and ask for instructions. However,
when the next normal frequency change along
the route is known to involve another ATC facility,
the pilot should contact that facility, if feasible,
for instructions. If communications cannot be
reestablished by either method, the pilot is expected
to request communication instructions from the FSS
appropriate to the route of flight.
Note: The exchange of information between an aircraft
and an ARTCC through an FSS is quicker than relay via
company radio because the FSS has direct interphone
lines to the responsible ARTCC sector. Accordingly,
when circumstances dictate a choice between the two
during an ARTCC frequency outage relay via FSS radio is
recommended.
Climbing and Descending En Route
When ATC issues a clearance or instruction, pilots are
expected to execute its provisions upon receipt. In some
cases, ATC includes words that modify their expectation.
For example, the word “immediately” in a clearance or
instruction is used to impress urgency to avoid an imminent
situation, and expeditious compliance is expected and
necessary for safety. The addition of a climb point or time
restriction, for example, does not authorize pilots to deviate
from the route of flight or any other provision of the ATC
clearance. If the pilot receives the term “climb at pilot’s
discretion” in the altitude information of an ATC clearance,
it means that the pilot has the option to start a climb when
they desire and are authorized to climb at any rate, and to
temporarily level off at any intermediate altitude as desired,
although once you vacate an altitude, you may not return to
that altitude. When ATC has not used the term nor imposed
any climb restrictions, pilots should climb promptly on
acknowledgment of the clearance. Climb at an optimum
rate consistent with the operating characteristics of the
aircraft to 1,000 feet below the assigned altitude, and then
attempt to climb at a rate of between 500 and 1,500 fpm
until the assigned altitude is reached. If at any time the
pilot is unable to climb at a rate of at least 500 fpm, advise
ATC. If it is necessary to level off at an intermediate altitude
during climb, advise ATC.
When ATC issues the instruction, “Expedite climb,” this
normally indicates that the pilot should use the approximate
best rate of climb without an exceptional change in aircraft
handling characteristics. Normally controllers inform pilots
of the reason for an instruction to expedite. If flying a
turbojet aircraft equipped with afterburner engines, such as
a military aircraft, pilots should advise ATC prior to takeoff
if intending to use afterburning during the climb to the en
route altitude. Often, the controller may be able to plan
traffic to accommodate a high performance climb and allow
the pilot to climb to the planned altitude without “expedite”
clearance from restriction. If you receive an ATC instruction,
and your altitude to maintain is subsequently changed
or restated without an expedite instruction, the expedite

instruction is canceled.
During en route climb, as in any other phase of flight,
it is essential that you clearly communicate with ATC
regarding clearances. In the following example, a flight crew
experienced an apparent clearance readback/hearback
error, that resulted in confusion about the clearance and,
ultimately, to inadequate separation from another aircraft.
“Departing IFR, clearance was to maintain 5,000 feet,
expect 12,000 in 10 minutes.” After handoff to Center, the
pilot understood and read back, “Leaving 5,000 turn left
heading 240° for vector on course.” The pilot turned to the
assigned heading climbing through 5,000 feet. At 5,300 feet,
Center advised assigned altitude was 5,000 feet. The pilot
immediately descended to 5,000. Center then informed
the pilot that there was traffic at 12 o’clock and a mile at
6,000. After passing traffic, a higher altitude was assigned
and climb resumed. The pilot then believed the clearance
was probably "reaching" 5,000, etc. Even the readback to the
controller with "leaving" did not catch the different wording.
“Reaching” and “leaving” are commonly used ATC terms
having different usages. They may be used in clearances
involving climbs, descents, turns, or speed changes. In the
flight deck, the words “reaching” and “leaving” sound much
alike.
For altitude awareness during climb, pilots often call out
altitudes on the flight deck. The pilot monitoring may call
2,000 and 1,000 feet prior to reaching an assigned altitude.
The callout may be, “two” climbing through the transit
to go altitude (QNH), both pilots set their altimeters to
29.92 inches of mercury and announce “2992 inches” (or
‘standard,’ on some aircraft) and the flight level passing.
For example, “2992 inches” (standard), flight level one
eight zero. The second officer on three pilot crews may
ensure that both pilots have inserted the proper altimeter
setting. On international flights, pilots must be prepared
to differentiate, if necessary, between barometric pressure
equivalents with inches of mercury, and millibars or
hectopascals, to eliminate any potential for error. For
example, 996 millibars erroneously being set as 2996.
For a typical IFR flight, the majority of in-flight time often
is flown in level flight at cruising altitude from top of climb
(TOC) to top of descent (TOD). Generally, TOD is used in
airplanes with a FMS and represents the point at which
descent is first initiated from cruise altitude. FMS also
assist in level flight by cruising at the most fuel saving
speed, providing continuing guidance along the flight plan
route including great circle direct routes, and continuous
evaluation and prediction of fuel consumption along with
changing clearance data.
Secondary area
Primary area holding pattern airspace area
Fix displacement area
Facility
Facility
Figure 2-70. Holding pattern design criteria template.

NOT FOR NAVIGATION
"...Hold southeast
of PINNE Intersection as published.
Expect further clearance at 1645."
There are at least three items in a clearance for a charted holding pattern:
• Direction to hold from the holding fix
• Holding fix
• Expect further clearance time
A clearance for an uncharted holding pattern contains additional information:
• Direction to hold from holding fix
• Holding fix
• The holding course (a specified radial,
magnetic bearing, airway or route number)
• The outbound leg length in minutes or
nautical miles when DME is used
• Nonstandard pattern, if used
• Expect further clearance time
"...Hold west
of Horst Intersection
5 mile legs
left turns
expect further clearance at 1430."
Figure 2-71. ATC holding instructions.
Aircraft Speed and Altitude
During the en route descent phase of flight, an additional
benefit a FMS is that it provides fuel saving idle thrust
descent to your destination airport. This allows an
uninterrupted profile descent from level cruising altitude
to an appropriate MIA, except where level flight is required
for speed adjustment. Controllers anticipate and plan that
Figure 2-72. Clearance limit holding.
CHERRELYN
D
( H )117.2 CHL
331°
269°
221°
126°
the pilot may level off at 10,000 feet MSL on descent to
comply with the 14 CFR Part 91 indicated airspeed limit of
250 knots. Leveling off at any other time on descent may
seriously affect air traffic handling by ATC. It is imperative
that pilots make every effort to fulfill ATC expected actions
on descent to aid in safely handling and expediting air
traffic.
ATC issues speed adjustments if the flight is being radar
controlled to achieve or maintain required or desired
spacing. They express speed adjustments in terms of knots
based on indicated airspeed in 10 knot increments except
that at or above FL 240 speeds may be expressed in terms
of Mach numbers in 0.01 increments. The use of Mach
numbers by ATC is restricted to turbojets. If complying
with speed adjustments, pilots are expected to maintain
that speed within plus or minus 10 knots or 0.02 Mach.
Speed and altitude restrictions in clearances are subject
to misinterpretation, as evidenced in this case where a
corporate flight crew treated instructions in a published
procedure as a clearance. The aircraft was at FL 310 and
had already programmed the ‘expect-crossing altitude’ of

Maximum Holding Airspeed:
KIAS
Maximum Holding Airspeed:
KIAS
Maximum Holding Airspeed:
KIAS
14,001'
MSL
14,000'
MSL
6,000'
MSL
Minimum
Holding
Altitude
(MHA)
6,001'
MSL
Figure 2-73. Maximum holding speeds for different altitudes.
17,000 feet at the VOR. When the altitude alerter sounded,
the pilot advised Center that we were leaving FL 310. ATC
acknowledged with a “Roger.” At FL 270, Center questioned
the pilot about the aircrafts descent. The pilot told the
controller that the reason for the descent was to cross the
VOR at 17,000 feet. ATC advised the pilot that he did not
have clearance to descend. What the pilot thought was a
clearance was in fact an “expect”clearance. Whenever pilots
are in doubt about a clearance it is imperative they request
clarity from ATC. Also, the term “Roger” only means that ATC
received the transmission, not that they understood the
transmission. “Expect” altitudes are published for planning
purposes and are not considered crossing restrictions until
verbally issued by ATC.
En Route Holding Procedures
The criteria for holding pattern airspace is developed
both to provide separation of aircraft, as well as obstacle
clearance. The alignment of holding patterns typically
coincides with the flight course you fly after leaving the
holding fix. For level holding, a minimum of 1,000 feet
obstacle clearance is provided throughout the primary
area. In the secondary area, 500 feet of obstacle clearance
is provided at the inner edge, tapering to zero feet at the
outer edge. Allowance for precipitous terrain is considered,
and the altitudes selected for obstacle clearance may be
rounded to the nearest 100 feet. When criteria for a climb
in hold are applied, no obstacle penetrates the holding
surface. [Figure 2-70]
There are many factors that affect aircraft during holding
maneuvers, including navigational aid ground and airborne
tolerance, effect of wind, flight procedures, application of
ATC, outbound leg length, maximum holding airspeeds,
fix to NAVAID distance, DME slant range effect, holding
airspace size, and altitude holding levels.
ATC Holding Instructions
When controllers anticipate a delay at a clearance limit or
fix, pilots are usually issued a holding clearance at least
five minutes before the ETA at the clearance limit or fix. If
the holding pattern assigned by ATC is depicted on the
appropriate aeronautical chart, pilots are expected to
hold as charted. In the following example, the controller
issues a holding clearance that includes the name of the
fix, directs the pilot to hold as charted, and includes an
expect further clearance (EFC) time. “Marathon five sixty
four, hold east of MIKEY Intersection as published, expect
further clearance at 1521.”
When ATC issues a clearance requiring you to hold at a fix
where a holding pattern is not charted, pilots are issued
complete holding instructions. The holding instructions
include the direction from the fix, name of the fix, course,
leg length, if appropriate, direction of turns (if left turns
are required), and the EFC time. Pilots are required to
maintain the last assigned altitude unless a new altitude is
specifically included in the holding clearance and should
fly right turns unless left turns are assigned. Note that all
holding instructions should include an EFC time. In the
event that two-way radio communication is lost, the EFC
allows the pilot to depart the holding fix at a definite time.
Pilots should plan the last lap of the holding pattern to
leave the fix as close as possible to the exact time. [Figure
2-71]
When approaching the clearance limit and you have
not received holding instructions from ATC, pilots are
expected to follow certain procedures. First, call ATC
and request further clearance before reaching the fix. If
further clearance cannot be obtained, pilots are expected
to hold at the fix in compliance with the charted holding
pattern. If a holding pattern is not charted at the fix, pilots
are expected to hold on the inbound course using right
turns. This procedure ensures that ATC provides adequate
separation. [Figure 2-72] For example, the aircraft is heading
eastbound on V214 and the Cherrelyn VORTAC is the
clearance limit and the pilot has not been able to obtain
further clearance and has not received holding instructions,
plan to hold southwest on the 221° radial using left-hand
turns, as depicted. If this holding pattern is not charted,
hold west of the VOR on V214 using right-hand turns.
Where required for aircraft separation, ATC may request
that the pilot hold at any designated reporting point in a

standard holding pattern at the MEA or the MRA, whichever
altitude is the higher at locations where a minimum holding
altitude has not been established. Unplanned holding at
en route fixes may be expected on airway or route radials,
bearings, or courses. If the fix is a facility, unplanned
holding could be on any radial or bearing and there may
be holding limitations required if standard holding cannot
be accomplished at the MEA or MRA.
Maximum Holding Speed
The size of the holding pattern is directly proportional
to the speed of the aircraft. In order to limit the amount
of airspace that must be protected by ATC, maximum
holding speeds in knots indicated airspeed (KIAS) have
been designated for specific altitude ranges. [Figure 2-73]
Even so, some holding patterns may have additional speed
restrictions to keep faster aircraft from flying out of the
protected area. If a holding pattern has a nonstandard
speed restriction, it is depicted by an icon with the limiting
airspeed. If the holding speed limit is less than the pilot feels
necessary, advise ATC of the revised holding speed. Also, if
the indicated airspeed exceeds the applicable maximum
holding speed, ATC expects the pilot to slow to the speed
limit within three minutes of the ETA at the holding fix.
Often pilots can avoid flying a holding pattern, or reduce
the length of time spent in the holding pattern, by slowing
down on the way to the holding fix.
High Performance Holding
When operating at higher airspeeds, there are certain
limitations that must be adhered to. For example, aircraft
do not make standard rate turns in holding patterns if the
bank angle exceeds 30°. If your aircraft is using a flight
director system, the bank angle is limited to 25°. The aircraft
must be traveling over 210 knots true airspeed (TAS) for the
bank angle in a standard rate turn to exceed 30°; therefore,
this limit applies to relatively fast aircraft. An aircraft using
a flight director would have to be holding at more than
170 knots TAS to come up against the 25° limit. These true
airspeeds correspond to indicated airspeeds of about 183
and 156 knots, respectively, at 6,000 feet in a standard
atmosphere.
En Route Safety Considerations
Fuel State Awareness
In order to increase fuel state awareness, pilots are required
to monitor the time and fuel remaining during an IFR flight.
For example, on a flight scheduled for one hour or less, the
flight crew may record the time and fuel remaining at the
top of climb (TOC) and at one additional waypoint listed
in the flight plan. Generally, TOC is used in aircraft with an
FMS, and represents the point at which cruise altitude is first
reached. TOC is calculated based on current altitude, climb
speed, and cruise altitude. The pilot may elect to delete the
additional waypoint recording requirement if the flight is
so short that the record will not assist in the management
of the flight. For flights scheduled for more than one hour,
the pilot may record the time and fuel remaining shortly
after TOC and at selected waypoints listed in the flight plan,
conveniently spaced approximately one hour apart. The
actual fuel burn is then compared to the planned fuel burn.
Each fuel tank must be monitored to verify proper burn
off and appropriate fuel remaining. For two-pilot aircraft,
the pilot monitoring (PM) keeps the flight plan record. On
three-pilot aircraft, the second officer and PM coordinate
recording and keeping the flight plan record. In all cases,
the crew member(s) making the recording communicates
the information to the pilot flying.
Diversion Procedures
OpSpecs for commercial operators include provisions for en
route emergency diversion airport requirements. Operators
are expected to develop a sufficient set of emergency
diversion airports, so that one or more can be reasonably
expected to be available in varying weather conditions.
The flight must be able to make a safe landing, and the
airplane maneuvered off of the runway at the selected
diversion airport. In the event of a disabled airplane
following landing, the capability to move the disabled
airplane must exist so as not to block the operation of any
recovery aircraft. In addition, those airports designated
for use must be capable of protecting the safety of all
personnel by being able to:
Offload the passengers and flight crew in a safe
manner during possible adverse weather conditions.
Provide for the physiological needs of the passengers
and flight crew for the duration until safe evacuation.
Be able to safely extract passengers and flight crew
as soon as possible. Execution and completion of the
recovery is expected within 12 to 48 hours following
diversion.
Part 91 operators also need to be prepared for a diversion.
Designation of an alternate on the IFR flight plan is a good
first step; but changing weather conditions or equipment
issues may require pilots to consider other options.