Chapter 8
Flight
.
Instruments
a
Introduction
In order to safely fly any aircraft, a pilot must understand
how to interpret and operate the flight instruments. The
pilot also needs to be able to recognize associated errors and
malfunctions of these instruments. This chapter addresses the
pitot-static system and associated instruments, the vacuum
system and related instruments, gyroscopic instruments, and
the magnetic compass. When a pilot understands how each
instrument works and recognizes when an instrument is
malfunctioning, he or she can safely utilize the instruments
to their fullest potential.
Pitot-Static Flight Instruments
The pitot-static system is a combined system that utilizes the
static air pressure and the dynamic pressure due to the motion
of the aircraft through the air. These combined pressures are
utilized for the operation of the airspeed indicator (ASI),
altimeter, and vertical speed indicator (VSI). [Figure 8-1]
8-1

Altimeter
Airspeed indicator (ASI)
Vertical speed indicator (VSI)
aaa
al
»
aaa
P~
@}
a
29.8
29.9
30.0
Pressure chamber
Static port
Static chamber
Baffle plate
Pitot tube
Drain hole
Jf
.
Ram air
Static hole
Heater (35 watts)
Alternate static source
Heater (100 watts)
Pitot heater switch
Figure 8-1. Pitot-static system and instruments.
Impact Pressure Chamber and Lines
precipitation. Both openings in the pitot tube must be checked
prior to flight to ensure that neither is blocked. Many aircraft
The pitot tube is utilized to measure the total combined
have pitot tube covers installed when they sit for extended
pressures that are present when an aircraft moves through
periods of time. This helps to keep bugs and other objects
the air. Static pressure, also known as ambient pressure, is
from becoming lodged in the opening of the pitot tube.
always present whether an aircraft is moving or at rest. It is
simply the barometric pressure in the local area. Dynamic
The one instrument that utilizes the pitot tube is the ASI. The
pressure is present only when an aircraft is in motion;
total pressure is transmitted to the ASI from the pitot tube’s
therefore, it can be thought of as a pressure due to motion.
pressure chamber via a small tube. The static pressure is
Wind also generates dynamic pressure. It does not matter if
also delivered to the opposite side of the ASI, which serves
the aircraft is moving through still air at 70 knots or if the
to cancel out the two static pressures, thereby leaving the
aircraft is facing a wind with a speed of 70 knots, the same
dynamic pressure to be indicated on the instrument. When
dynamic pressure is generated.
the dynamic pressure changes, the ASI shows either increase
or decrease, corresponding to the direction of change. The
When the wind blows from an angle less than 90° off the
two remaining instruments (altimeter and VSI) utilize only
nose of the aircraft, dynamic pressure can be depicted on the
the static pressure that is derived from the static port.
ASI. The wind moving across the airfoil at 20 knots is the
same as the aircraft moving through calm air at 20 knots.
Static Pressure Chamber and Lines
The pitot tube captures the dynamic pressure, as well as the
The static chamber is vented through small holes to the
static pressure that is always present.
free undisturbed air on the side(s) of the aircraft. As the
atmospheric pressure changes, the pressure is able to move
The pitot tube has a small opening at the front that allows
freely in and out of the instruments through the small lines
the total pressure to enter the pressure chamber. The total
that connect the instruments to the static system. An alternate
pressure is made up of dynamic pressure plus static pressure.
static source is provided in some aircraft to provide static
In addition to the larger hole in the front of the pitot tube,
pressure should the primary static source become blocked.
there is a small hole in the back of the chamber that allows
The alternate static source is normally found inside the flight
moisture to drain from the system should the aircraft enter
8-2

deck. Due to the venturi effect of the air flowing around the
fuselage, the air pressure inside the flight deck is lower than
the exterior pressure.
When the alternate static source pressure is used, the
following instrument indications are observed:
1. The altimeter indicates a slightly higher altitude than
actual.
2. The ASI indicates an airspeed greater than the actual
airspeed.
3. The VSI shows a momentary climb and then stabilizes
if the altitude is held constant.
Each pilot is responsible for consulting the Aircraft Flight
Manual (AFM) or the Pilot’s Operating Handbook (POH)
to determine the amount of error that is introduced into the
system when utilizing the alternate static source. In an aircraft
not equipped with an alternate static source, an alternate
method of introducing static pressure into the system should
a blockage occur is to break the glass face of the VSI. This
most likely renders the VSI inoperative. The reason for
choosing the VSI as the instrument to break is that it is the
least important static source instrument for flight.
Altimeter
The altimeter is an instrument that measures the height of
an aircraft above a given pressure level. Pressure levels
are discussed later in detail. Since the altimeter is the only
instrument that is capable of indicating altitude, this is one of
the most vital instruments installed in the aircraft. To use the
altimeter effectively, the pilot must understand the operation
of the instrument, as well as the errors associated with the
altimeter and how each affect the indication.
A stack of sealed aneroid wafers comprise the main
component of the altimeter. An aneroid wafer is a sealed
wafer that is evacuated to an internal pressure of 29.92
inches of mercury ("Hg). These wafers are free to expand
and contract with changes to the static pressure. A higher
static pressure presses down on the wafers and causes them
to collapse. A lower static pressure (less than 29.92 "Hg)
allows the wafers to expand. A mechanical linkage connects
the wafer movement to the needles on the indicator face,
which translates compression of the wafers into a decrease
in altitude and translates an expansion of the wafers into an
increase in altitude. [Figure 8-2]
Notice how the static pressure is introduced into the rear of the
sealed altimeter case. The altimeter’s outer chamber is sealed,
which allows the static pressure to surround the aneroid
wafers. If the static pressure is higher than the pressure in the
aneroid wafers (29.92 "Hg), then the wafers are compressed
100 ft. pointer
10,000 ft. pointer
1,000 ft. pointer
Aneroid wafers
—
s
|
|
~
|
|
|
=
SY
Crosshatch flag
Static port
A crosshatched area appears on
some altimeters when displaying
an altitude below 10,000 feet MSL.
Barometric scale adjustment knob
Altimeter setting window
Figure 8-2. Altimeter.
until the pressure inside the wafers is equal to the surrounding
static pressure. Conversely, if the static pressure is less than
the pressure inside of the wafers, the wafers are able to expand
which increases the volume. The expansion and contraction
of the wafers moves the mechanical linkage which drives the
needles on the face of the altimeter.
Principle of Operation
The pressure altimeter is an aneroid barometer that measures
the pressure of the atmosphere at the level where the altimeter is
located and presents an altitude indication in feet. The altimeter
uses static pressure as its source of operation. Air is denser
at sea level than aloft—as altitude increases, atmospheric
pressure decreases. This difference in pressure at various levels
causes the altimeter to indicate changes in altitude.
The presentation of altitude varies considerably between
different types of altimeters. Some have one pointer while
others have two or more. Only the multipointer type is
discussed in this handbook. The dial of a typical altimeter
is graduated with numerals arranged clockwise from zero
to nine. Movement of the aneroid element is transmitted
through gears to the three hands that indicate altitude. In
Figure 8-2, the long, thin needle with the inverted triangle
at the end indicates tens of thousands of feet; the short, wide
needle indicates thousands of feet; and the long needle on
top indicates hundreds of feet.
8-3

This indicated altitude is correct, however, only when the
sea level barometric pressure is standard (29.92 "Hg), the sea
level free air temperature is standard (+15 degrees Celsius
(°C) or 59 degrees Fahrenheit (°F)), and the pressure and
temperature decrease at a standard rate with an increase
in altitude. Adjustments for nonstandard pressures are
accomplished by setting the corrected pressure into a
barometric scale located on the face of the altimeter. The
barometric pressure window is sometimes referred to as
the Kollsman window; only after the altimeter is set does it
indicate the correct altitude. The word “correct” will need
to be better explained when referring to types of altitudes,
but is commonly used in this case to denote the approximate
altitude above sea level. In other words, the indicated
altitude refers to the altitude read off of the altitude which is
uncorrected, after the barometric pressure setting is dialed
into the Kollsman window. The additional types of altitudes
are further explained later.
Effect of Nonstandard Pressure and Temperature
It is easy to maintain a consistent height above ground if
the barometric pressure and temperature remain constant,
but this is rarely the case. The pressure and temperature can
change between takeoff and landing even on a local flight.
If these changes are not taken into consideration, flight
becomes dangerous.
If altimeters could not be adjusted for nonstandard pressure, a
hazardous situation could occur. For example, if an aircraft is
flown from a high pressure area to a low pressure area without
adjusting the altimeter, a constant altitude will be displayed,
but the actual height of the aircraft above the ground would
a
5,000 foot pressure level
i|
4,000 foot pressure level
|
3,000 foot pressure level
2,000 foot pressure level
i
et
1,000 foot pressure level
——
Sea level
Figure 8-3. Effects of nonstandard temperature on an altimeter.
8-4
be lower then the indicated altitude. There is an old aviation
axiom: “GOING FROM A HIGH TO A LOW, LOOK OUT
BELOW.” Conversely, if an aircraft is flown from a low
pressure area to a high pressure area without an adjustment
of the altimeter, the actual altitude of the aircraft is higher
than the indicated altitude. Once in flight, it is important to
frequently obtain current altimeter settings en route to ensure
terrain and obstruction clearance.
Many altimeters do not have an accurate means of being
adjusted for barometric pressures in excess of 31.00
"Hg. When the altimeter cannot be set to the higher
pressure setting, the aircraft actual altitude is higher than
the altimeter indicates. When low barometric pressure
conditions occur (below 28.00), flight operations by
aircraft unable to set the actual altimeter setting are
not recommended.
Adjustments to compensate for nonstandard pressure do
not compensate for nonstandard temperature. Since cold
air is denser than warm air, when operating in temperatures
that are colder than standard, the altitude is lower than the
altimeter indication. [Figure 8-3] It is the magnitude of this
“difference” that determines the magnitude of the error. It is
the difference due to colder temperatures that concerns the
pilot. When flying into a cooler air mass while maintaining a
constant indicated altitude, true altitude is lower. If terrain or
obstacle clearance is a factor in selecting a cruising altitude,
particularly in mountainous terrain, remember to anticipate
that a colder-than-standard temperature places the aircraft
lower than the altimeter indicates. Therefore, a higher
indicated altitude may be required to provide adequate terrain
clearance. A variation of the memory aid used for pressure
|
30°C
15°C
—
—
0°C
—

can be employed: “FROM HOT TO COLD, LOOK OUT
at higher levels, particularly the effect of nonstandard
BELOW.” When the air is warmer than standard, the aircraft
temperature. If each pilot in a given area is using the same
is higher than the altimeter indicates. Altitude corrections for
altimeter setting, each altimeter should be equally affected
temperature can be computed on the navigation computer.
by temperature and pressure variation errors, making it
possible to maintain the desired vertical separation between
Extremely cold temperatures also affect altimeter indications.
aircraft. This does not guarantee vertical separation though.
Figure 8-4, which was derived from ICAO formulas,
It is still imperative to maintain a regimented visual scan for
indicates how much error can exist when the temperature is
intruding air traffic.
extremely cold.
When flying over high, mountainous terrain, certain
Setting the Altimeter
atmospheric conditions cause the altimeter to indicate an
altitude of 1,000 feet or more higher than the actual altitude.
Most altimeters are equipped with a barometric pressure
For this reason, a generous margin of altitude should be
setting window (or Kollsman window) providing a means
allowed—not only for possible altimeter error, but also for
to adjust the altimeter. A knob is located at the bottom of the
possible downdrafts that might be associated with high winds.
instrument for this adjustment.
To illustrate the use of the altimeter setting system, follow a
To adjust the altimeter for variation in atmospheric pressure,
flight from Dallas Love Field, Texas, to Abilene Municipal
the pressure scale in the altimeter setting window, calibrated
Airport, Texas, via Mineral Wells. Before taking off from
in inches of mercury ("Hg) and/or millibars (mb), is adjusted
Love Field, the pilot receives a current altimeter setting of
to match the given altimeter setting. Altimeter setting is
29.85 "Hg from the control tower or ATIS and sets this value
defined as station pressure reduced to sea level, but an
in the altimeter setting window. The altimeter indication
altimeter setting is accurate only in the vicinity of the
should then be compared with the known airport elevation of
reporting station. Therefore, the altimeter must be adjusted as
487 feet. Since most altimeters are not perfectly calibrated,
the flight progresses from one station to the next. Air traffic
an error may exist.
control (ATC) will advise when updated altimeter settings
are available. If a pilot is not utilizing ATC assistance,
When over Mineral Wells, assume the pilot receives a current
local altimeter settings can be obtained by monitoring local
altimeter setting of 29.94 "Hg and sets this in the altimeter
automated weather observing system/automated surface
window. Before entering the traffic pattern at Abilene
observation system (AWOS/ASOS) or automatic terminal
Municipal Airport, a new altimeter setting of 29.69 "Hg
information service (ATIS) broadcasts.
is received from the Abilene Control Tower and set in
the altimeter setting window. If the pilot desires to fly the
Many pilots confidently expect the current altimeter setting
traffic pattern at approximately 800 feet above the terrain,
will compensate for irregularities in atmospheric pressure at
and the field elevation of Abilene is 1,791 feet, an indicated
all altitudes, but this is not always true. The altimeter setting
altitude of 2,600 feet should be maintained (1,791 feet +
broadcast by ground stations is the station pressure corrected
800 feet = 2,591 feet, rounded to 2,600 feet).
to mean sea level. It does not account for the irregularities
The importance of properly setting the altimeter cannot
Height Above Airport in Feet
Temp 0 °C
be overemphasized. Assume the pilot did not adjust the
Reported
3,000
4,000
5,000
2,000
altimeter at Abilene to the current setting and continued using
1,000
1,500
the Mineral Wells setting of 29.94 "Hg. When entering the
+10
Abilene traffic pattern at an indicated altitude of 2,600 feet,
the aircraft would be approximately 250 feet below the proper
-10
traffic pattern altitude. Upon landing, the altimeter would
-20
indicate approximately 250 feet higher than the field elevation.
-30
Mineral Wells altimeter setting
-40
1,210
Abilene altimeter setting
-50
1,190
1,500
Difference
Figure 8-4. Look at the chart using a temperature of –10 °C and
an aircraft altitude of 1,000 feet above the airport elevation. The
(Since 1 inch of pressure is equal to approximately 1,000 feet
chart shows that the reported current altimeter setting may place
of altitude, 0.25 × 1,000 feet = 250 feet.)
the aircraft as much as 100 feet below the altitude indicated by
the altimeter.
29.94
29.69
0.25
8-5

When determining whether to add or subtract the amount of
altimeter error, remember that when the actual pressure is lower
than what is set in the altimeter window, the actual altitude
of the aircraft is lower than what is indicated on the altimeter.
The following is another method of computing the altitude
deviation. Start by subtracting the current altimeter setting
from 29.94 "Hg. Always remember to place the original setting
as the top number. Then subtract the current altimeter setting.
Mineral Wells altimeter setting
Abilene altimeter setting
29.94 – 29.69 = Difference
(Since 1 inch of pressure is equal to approximately 1,000 feet
of altitude, 0.25 × 1,000 feet = 250 feet.) Always subtract
the number from the indicated altitude.
2,600 – 250 = 2,350
Now, try a lower pressure setting. Adjust from altimeter
setting 29.94 to 30.56 "Hg.
Mineral Wells altimeter setting
Altimeter setting
29.94 – 30.56 = Difference
(Since 1 inch of pressure is equal to approximately 1,000 feet
of altitude, 0.62 × 1,000 feet = 620 feet.) Always subtract
the number from the indicated altitude.
2,600 – (–620) = 3,220
The pilot will be 620 feet high.
Notice the difference is a negative number. Starting with the
current indicated altitude of 2,600 feet, subtracting a negative
number is the same as adding the two numbers. By utilizing
this method, a pilot will better understand the importance of
using the current altimeter setting (miscalculation of where
and in what direction an error lies can affect safety; if altitude
is lower than indicated altitude, an aircraft could be in danger
of colliding with an obstacle).
Altimeter Operation
There are two means by which the altimeter pointers can
be moved. The first is a change in air pressure, while the
other is an adjustment to the barometric scale. When the
aircraft climbs or descends, changing pressure within the
altimeter case expands or contracts the aneroid barometer.
This movement is transmitted through mechanical linkage
to rotate the pointers.
8-6
A decrease in pressure causes the altimeter to indicate an
increase in altitude, and an increase in pressure causes the
altimeter to indicate a decrease in altitude. Accordingly, if
the aircraft is sitting on the ground with a pressure level of
29.98 "Hg and the pressure level changes to 29.68 "Hg, the
altimeter would show an increase of approximately 300 feet
in altitude. This pressure change is most noticeable when the
aircraft is left parked over night. As the pressure falls, the
altimeter interprets this as a climb. The altimeter indicates
an altitude above the actual field elevation. If the barometric
29.94
pressure setting is reset to the current altimeter setting of 29.68
29.69
"Hg, then the field elevation is again indicated on the altimeter.
0.25
This pressure change is not as easily noticed in flight since
aircraft fly at specific altitudes. The aircraft steadily decreases
true altitude while the altimeter is held constant through pilot
action as discussed in the previous section.
Knowing the aircraft’s altitude is vitally important to a
pilot. The pilot must be sure that the aircraft is flying high
enough to clear the highest terrain or obstruction along the
intended route. It is especially important to have accurate
29.94
altitude information when visibility is restricted. To clear
obstructions, the pilot must constantly be aware of the altitude
30.56
of the aircraft and the elevation of the surrounding terrain. To
–0.62
reduce the possibility of a midair collision, it is essential to
maintain altitude in accordance with air traffic rules.
Types of Altitude
Altitude in itself is a relevant term only when it is specifically
stated to which type of altitude a pilot is referring. Normally
when the term “altitude” is used, it is referring to altitude
above sea level since this is the altitude which is used to
depict obstacles and airspace, as well as to separate air traffic.
Altitude is vertical distance above some point or level used as
a reference. There are as many kinds of altitude as there are
reference levels from which altitude is measured, and each
may be used for specific reasons. Pilots are mainly concerned
with five types of altitudes:
1. Indicated altitude—read directly from the altimeter
(uncorrected) when it is set to the current altimeter
setting.
2. True altitude—the vertical distance of the aircraft
above sea level—the actual altitude. It is often
expressed as feet above mean sea level (MSL). Airport,
terrain, and obstacle elevations on aeronautical charts
are true altitudes.

3. Absolute altitude—the vertical distance of an aircraft
above the terrain, or above ground level (AGL).
4. Pressure altitude—the altitude indicated when
the altimeter setting window (barometric scale) is
adjusted to 29.92 "Hg. This is the altitude above
the standard datum plane, which is a theoretical
plane where air pressure (corrected to 15 °C) equals
29.92 "Hg. Pressure altitude is used to compute density
altitude, true altitude, true airspeed (TAS), and other
performance data.
5. Density altitude—pressure altitude corrected
for variations from standard temperature. When
conditions are standard, pressure altitude and density
altitude are the same. If the temperature is above
standard, the density altitude is higher than pressure
altitude. If the temperature is below standard, the
density altitude is lower than pressure altitude. This
is an important altitude because it is directly related
to the aircraft’s performance.
A pilot must understand how the performance of the aircraft
is directly related to the density of the air. The density of
the air affects how much power a naturally aspirated engine
produces, as well as how efficient the airfoils are. If there are
fewer air molecules (lower pressure) to accelerate through
the propeller, the acceleration to rotation speed is longer
and thus produces a longer takeoff roll, which translates to
a decrease in performance.
As an example, consider an airport with a field elevation
of 5,048 feet MSL where the standard temperature is 5 °C.
Under these conditions, pressure altitude and density altitude
are the same—5,048 feet. If the temperature changes to
30 °C, the density altitude increases to 7,855 feet. This
means an aircraft would perform on takeoff as though the
field elevation were 7,855 feet at standard temperature.
Conversely, a temperature of –25 °C would result in a density
altitude of 1,232 feet. An aircraft would perform much better
under these conditions.
Instrument Check
Prior to each flight, a pilot should examine the altimeter for
proper indications in order to verify its validity. To determine
the condition of an altimeter, set the barometric scale to the
current reported altimeter setting transmitted by the local
airport traffic control tower, flight service station (FSS), or
any other reliable source, such as ATIS, AWOS, or ASOS.
The altimeter pointers should indicate the surveyed field
elevation of the airport. If the indication is off more than
75 feet from the surveyed field elevation, the instrument
should be referred to a certificated instrument repair station
for recalibration.
Vertical Speed Indicator (VSI)
The VSI, which is sometimes called a vertical velocity
indicator (VVI), indicates whether the aircraft is climbing,
descending, or in level flight. The rate of climb or descent is
indicated in feet per minute (fpm). If properly calibrated, the
VSI indicates zero in level flight. [Figure 8-5]
Principle of Operation
Although the VSI operates solely from static pressure, it is a
differential pressure instrument. It contains a diaphragm with
connecting linkage and gearing to the indicator pointer inside
an airtight case. The inside of the diaphragm is connected
directly to the static line of the pitot-static system. The area
outside the diaphragm, which is inside the instrument case,
is also connected to the static line but through a restricted
orifice (calibrated leak).
Both the diaphragm and the case receive air from the static
line at existing atmospheric pressure. The diaphragm receives
unrestricted air, while the case receives the static pressure via
the metered leak. When the aircraft is on the ground or in level
flight, the pressures inside the diaphragm and the instrument
case are equal, and the pointer is at the zero indication.
When the aircraft climbs or descends, the pressure inside
the diaphragm changes immediately, but due to the metering
action of the restricted passage, the case pressure remains
higher or lower for a short time, causing the diaphragm to
contract or expand. This causes a pressure differential that
is indicated on the instrument needle as a climb or descent.
When the pressure differential stabilizes at a definite ratio,
the needle indicates the rate of altitude change.
Diaphragm
—
I
_
|
ee
VERTICAL SPEED
i
UP
THOUSAND FT PER MIN
=
I
DOWN
SY
Direct static pressure
Calibrated leak
Figure 8-5. Vertical speed indicator (VSI).
8-7

The VSI displays two different types of information:
•
Trend information shows an immediate indication of
an increase or decrease in the aircraft’s rate of climb
or descent.
•
Rate information shows a stabilized rate of change in
altitude.
The trend information is the direction of movement of the
VSI needle. For example, if an aircraft is maintaining level
flight and the pilot pulls back on the control yoke causing the
nose of the aircraft to pitch up, the VSI needle moves upward
to indicate a climb. If the pitch attitude is held constant,
the needle stabilizes after a short period (6–9 seconds) and
indicates the rate of climb in hundreds of fpm. The time
period from the initial change in the rate of climb, until the
VSI displays an accurate indication of the new rate, is called
the lag. Rough control technique and turbulence can extend
the lag period and cause erratic and unstable rate indications.
Some aircraft are equipped with an instantaneous vertical
speed indicator (IVSI), which incorporates accelerometers
to compensate for the lag in the typical VSI. [Figure 8-6]
Instrument Check
As part of a preflight check, proper operation of the VSI
must be established. Make sure the VSI indicates a near zero
reading prior to leaving the ramp area and again just before
takeoff. If the VSI indicates anything other than zero, that
indication can be referenced as the zero mark. Normally, if the
needle is not exactly zero, it is only slightly above or below
the zero line. After takeoff, the VSI should trend upward to
indicate a positive rate of climb and then, once a stabilized
climb is established, a rate of climb can be referenced.
Accelerometer
=
_
a
,
~~
—
_ &§
ge
li
-
.
a
Pa
\
a
St
SF
I
.5
UP
ys
|
\
—
]
.5
DOWN
I
>
Inlet from static port
=
Calibrated leak
Figure 8-6. An IVSI incorporates accelerometers to help the
instrument immediately indicate changes in vertical speed.
8-8
Airspeed Indicator (ASI)
The ASI is a sensitive, differential pressure gauge that
measures and promptly indicates the difference between pitot
(impact/dynamic pressure) and static pressure. These two
pressures are equal when the aircraft is parked on the ground
in calm air. When the aircraft moves through the air, the
pressure on the pitot line becomes greater than the pressure
in the static lines. This difference in pressure is registered by
the airspeed pointer on the face of the instrument, which is
calibrated in miles per hour, knots (nautical miles per hour),
or both. [Figure 8-7]
The ASI is the one instrument that utilizes both the pitot,
as well as the static system. The ASI introduces the static
pressure into the airspeed case while the pitot pressure
(dynamic) is introduced into the diaphragm. The dynamic
pressure expands or contracts one side of the diaphragm,
which is attached to an indicating system. The system drives
the mechanical linkage and the airspeed needle.
Just as in altitudes, there are multiple types of airspeeds.
Pilots need to be very familiar with each type.
•
Indicated airspeed (IAS)—the direct instrument
reading obtained from the ASI, uncorrected for
variations in atmospheric density, installation error,
or instrument error. Manufacturers use this airspeed
as the basis for determining aircraft performance.
Takeoff, landing, and stall speeds listed in the AFM/
POH are IAS and do not normally vary with altitude
or temperature.
Diaphragm
Long lever
Sector
_
~
Pitot connection
-
-
=
~
Pitot tube
-
_
-_
Ram air
Handstaff pinion
Static air line
Figure 8-7. Airspeed indicator (ASI).

•
Calibrated airspeed (CAS)—IAS corrected for
installation error and instrument error. Although
manufacturers attempt to keep airspeed errors to a
minimum, it is not possible to eliminate all errors
throughout the airspeed operating range. At certain
airspeeds and with certain flap settings, the installation
and instrument errors may total several knots. This
error is generally greatest at low airspeeds. In the
cruising and higher airspeed ranges, IAS and CAS
are approximately the same. Refer to the airspeed
calibration chart to correct for possible airspeed errors.
•
True airspeed (TAS)—CAS corrected for altitude
and nonstandard temperature. Because air density
decreases with an increase in altitude, an aircraft has
to be flown faster at higher altitudes to cause the same
pressure difference between pitot impact pressure
and static pressure. Therefore, for a given CAS, TAS
increases as altitude increases; or for a given TAS,
CAS decreases as altitude increases. A pilot can find
TAS by two methods. The most accurate method is
to use a flight computer. With this method, the CAS
is corrected for temperature and pressure variation by
using the airspeed correction scale on the computer.
Extremely accurate electronic flight computers are
also available. Just enter the CAS, pressure altitude,
and temperature, and the computer calculates the TAS.
A second method, which is a rule of thumb, provides
the approximate TAS. Simply add 2 percent to the
CAS for each 1,000 feet of altitude. The TAS is the
speed that is used for flight planning and is used when
filing a flight plan.
•
Groundspeed (GS)—the actual speed of the airplane
over the ground. It is TAS adjusted for wind. GS
decreases with a headwind and increases with a
tailwind.
Airspeed Indicator Markings
Aircraft weighing 12,500 pounds or less, manufactured after
1945, and certificated by the FAA are required to have ASIs
marked in accordance with a standard color-coded marking
system. This system of color-coded markings enables a pilot
to determine at a glance certain airspeed limitations that are
important to the safe operation of the aircraft. For example, if
during the execution of a maneuver, it is noted that the airspeed
needle is in the yellow arc and rapidly approaching the red
line, the immediate reaction should be to reduce airspeed.
As shown in Figure 8-8, ASIs on single-engine small aircraft
include the following standard color-coded markings:
•
White arc—commonly referred to as the flap operating
range since its lower limit represents the full flap stall
speed and its upper limit provides the maximum flap
VNE (red line)
VS0
Yellow arc
el
>»
eal
a
VS1
F°
>.
-
PRESS
ALT
AIRSPEED
ei
KNOTS
VN0
White arc
MPH
MPH
T.A.S.
el
KTS
VFE
Green arc
ei
Figure 8-8. Single engine airspeed indicator (ASI).
speed. Approaches and landings are usually flown at
speeds within the white arc.
•
Lower limit of white arc (VS0)—the stalling speed
or the minimum steady flight speed in the landing
configuration. In small aircraft, this is the power-off
stall speed at the maximum landing weight in the
landing configuration (gear and flaps down).
•
Upper limit of the white arc (VFE)—the maximum
speed with the flaps extended.
•
Green arc—the normal operating range of the aircraft.
Most flying occurs within this range.
•
Lower limit of green arc (VS1)—the stalling speed
or the minimum steady flight speed obtained in a
specified configuration. For most aircraft, this is the
power-off stall speed at the maximum takeoff weight
in the clean configuration (gear up, if retractable, and
flaps up).
•
Upper limit of green arc (VN0)—the maximum
structural cruising speed. Do not exceed this speed
except in smooth air.
•
Yellow arc—caution range. Fly within this range only
in smooth air and then only with caution.
•
Red line (VNE)—never exceed speed. Operating above
this speed is prohibited since it may result in damage
or structural failure.
Other Airspeed Limitations
Some important airspeed limitations are not marked on the
face of the ASI, but are found on placards and in the AFM/
POH. These airspeeds include:
8-9

•
Design maneuvering speed (VA)—the maximum
speed at which the structural design’s limit load can
be imposed (either by gusts or full deflection of the
control surfaces) without causing structural damage.
It is important to consider weight when referencing
this speed. For example, VA may be 100 knots when
an airplane is heavily loaded, but only 90 knots when
the load is light.
•
Landing gear operating speed (VLO)—the maximum
speed for extending or retracting the landing gear if
flying an aircraft with retractable landing gear.
•
Landing gear extended speed (VLE)—the maximum
speed at which an aircraft can be safely flown with
the landing gear extended.
•
Best angle-of-climb speed (VX)—the airspeed at
which an aircraft gains the greatest amount of altitude
in a given distance. It is used during a short-field
takeoff to clear an obstacle.
•
Best rate-of-climb speed (VY)—the airspeed that
provides the most altitude gain in a given period of time.
•
Single-engine best rate-of-climb (VYSE)—the best
rate-of-climb or minimum rate-of-sink in a light
twin-engine aircraft with one engine inoperative. It is
marked on the ASI with a blue line. VYSE is commonly
referred to as “Blue Line.”
•
Minimum control speed (VMC)—the minimum flight
speed at which a light, twin-engine aircraft can be
satisfactorily controlled when an engine suddenly
becomes inoperative and the remaining engine is at
takeoff power.
Instrument Check
Prior to takeoff, the ASI should read zero. However, if there
is a strong wind blowing directly into the pitot tube, the ASI
may read higher than zero. When beginning the takeoff,
make sure the airspeed is increasing at an appropriate rate.
Blockage of the Pitot-Static System
Errors almost always indicate blockage of the pitot tube, the
static port(s), or both. Blockage may be caused by moisture
(including ice), dirt, or even insects. During preflight, make
sure the pitot tube cover is removed. Then, check the pitot and
static port openings. A blocked pitot tube affects the accuracy
of the ASI, but a blockage of the static port not only affects
the ASI, but also causes errors in the altimeter and VSI.
Blocked Pitot System
The pitot system can become blocked completely or only
partially if the pitot tube drain hole remains open. If the pitot
tube becomes blocked and its associated drain hole remains
clear, ram air is no longer able to enter the pitot system. Air
8-10
already in the system vents through the drain hole, and the
remaining pressure drops to ambient (outside) air pressure.
Under these circumstances, the ASI reading decreases to
zero because the ASI senses no difference between ram and
static air pressure. The ASI no longer operates since dynamic
pressure cannot enter the pitot tube opening. Static pressure
is able to equalize on both sides since the pitot drain hole
is still open. The apparent loss of airspeed is not usually
instantaneous but happens very quickly. [Figure 8-9]
If both the pitot tube opening and the drain hole should
become clogged simultaneously, then the pressure in the pitot
tube is trapped. No change is noted on the airspeed indication
should the airspeed increase or decrease. If the static port
is unblocked and the aircraft should change altitude, then a
change is noted on the ASI. The change is not related to a
change in airspeed but a change in static pressure. The total
pressure in the pitot tube does not change due to the blockage;
however, the static pressure will change.
Because airspeed indications rely upon both static and
dynamic pressure together, the blockage of either of these
systems affects the ASI reading. Remember that the ASI has
a diaphragm in which dynamic air pressure is entered. Behind
this diaphragm is a reference pressure called static pressure
that comes from the static ports. The diaphragm pressurizes
against this static pressure and as a result changes the airspeed
indication via levers and indicators. [Figure 8-10]
For example, take an aircraft and slow it down to zero knots
at a given altitude. If the static port (providing static pressure)
and the pitot tube (providing dynamic pressure) are both
unobstructed, the following claims can be made:
1. The ASI would be zero.
2. Dynamic pressure and static pressure are equal.
3. Because both dynamic and static air pressure are equal
at zero speed with increased speed, dynamic pressure
>»
Pitot tube
Static port
Blockage
Drain hole
Figure 8-9. A blocked pitot tube, but clear drain hole.

diaphragm causing it to compress, thereby resulting in an
aa
»
indication of decreased airspeed. Conversely, if the aircraft
were to climb, the static pressure would decrease allowing
EG
the diaphragm to expand, thereby showing an indication of
greater airspeed. [Figure 8-10]
The pitot tube may become blocked during flight due to
Blockage
Static port
visible moisture. Some aircraft may be equipped with pitot
heat for flight in visible moisture. Consult the AFM/POH for
specific procedures regarding the use of pitot heat.
Pitot tube
Drain hole
Blocked Static System
If the static system becomes blocked but the pitot tube
remains clear, the ASI continues to operate; however, it
aaa
»
-_
is inaccurate. The airspeed indicates lower than the actual
airspeed when the aircraft is operated above the altitude
where the static ports became blocked because the trapped
static pressure is higher than normal for that altitude. When
Climb
operating at a lower altitude, a faster than actual airspeed is
displayed due to the relatively low static pressure trapped
in the system.
Revisiting the ratios that were used to explain a blocked pitot
>»
eal
Descent
tube, the same principle applies for a blocked static port. If
the aircraft descends, the static pressure increases on the pitot
side showing an increase on the ASI. This assumes that the
aircraft does not actually increase its speed. The increase in
static pressure on the pitot side is equivalent to an increase
in dynamic pressure since the pressure cannot change on
the static side.
Figure 8-10. Blocked pitot system with clear static system.
If an aircraft begins to climb after a static port becomes
must include two components: static pressure and
blocked, the airspeed begins to show a decrease as the
dynamic pressure.
aircraft continues to climb. This is due to the decrease in
static pressure on the pitot side, while the pressure on the
It can be inferred that airspeed indication must be based upon
static side is held constant.
a relationship between these two pressures, and indeed it is.
An ASI uses the static pressure as a reference pressure and
A blockage of the static system also affects the altimeter and
as a result, the ASI’s case is kept at this pressure behind the
VSI. Trapped static pressure causes the altimeter to freeze
diaphragm. On the other hand, the dynamic pressure through
at the altitude where the blockage occurred. In the case of
the pitot tube is connected to a highly sensitive diaphragm
the VSI, a blocked static system produces a continuous zero
within the ASI case. Because an aircraft in zero motion
indication. [Figure 8-11]
(regardless of altitude) results in a zero airspeed, the pitot tube
always provides static pressure in addition to dynamic pressure.
Some aircraft are equipped with an alternate static source in
the flight deck. In the case of a blocked static source, opening
Therefore, the airspeed indication is the result of two
the alternate static source introduces static pressure from the
pressures: the pitot tube static and dynamic pressure within
flight deck into the system. Flight deck static pressure is lower
the diaphragm as measured against the static pressure in the
than outside static pressure. Check the aircraft AOM/POH for
ASI’s case.
airspeed corrections when utilizing alternate static pressure.
If the aircraft were to descend while the pitot tube is
obstructed, the pressure in the pitot system, including the
diaphragm, would remain constant. But as the descent
is made, the static pressure would increase against the
8-11

available to a pilot, but also how the information is displayed.
Inaccurate airspeed indications
In addition to the improvement in system reliability, which
increases overall safety, EFDs have decreased the overall cost
Constant zero indication on VSI
of equipping aircraft with state-of-the-art instrumentation.
Primary electronic instrumentation packages are less prone
Frozen altimeter
to failure than their analogue counterparts. No longer is it
necessary for aircraft designers to create cluttered panel
al
al
al
>
=
-_
layouts in order to accommodate all necessary flight
@
|
instruments. Instead, multi-panel digital flight displays
29.8
29.9
30.0
combine all flight instruments onto a single screen that is
called a primary flight display (PFD). The traditional “six
pack” of instruments is now displayed on one liquid crystal
Pitot tube
display (LCD) screen.
Airspeed Tape
Blockage
Configured similarly to traditional panel layouts, the ASI
Static port
is located on the left side of the screen and is displayed as
a vertical speed tape. As the aircraft increases in speed, the
larger numbers descend from the top of the tape. The TAS is
Figure 8-11. Blocked static system.
displayed at the bottom of the tape through the input to the air
data computer (ADC) from the outside air temperature probe.
Electronic Flight Display (EFD)
Airspeed markings for VX, VY, and rotation speed (VR) are
Advances in technology have brought about changes in the
displayed for pilot reference. An additional pilot-controlled
instrumentation found in all types of aircraft; for example,
airspeed bug is available to set at any desired reference speed.
Electronic Flight Displays (EFDs) commonly referred to
As on traditional analogue ASIs, the electronic airspeed tape
as “glass cockpits.” EFDs include flight displays such as
displays the color-coded ranges for the flap operating range,
primary flight displays (PFD) and multi-function displays
(MFD). This has changed not only what information is
WPT _ _ _ _ _ _ DIS _ _ ._ NM DTK _ _ _°T TRK 360°
NAV1 108.00 113.00
134.000 118.000 COM1
Slip skid indicator
Attitude indicator
Altimeter
oO
-
oO
-
NAV2 108.00 110.60
123.800 118.000 COM2
oO
oO
-
Vertical speed indicator (VSI)
Y
—
Airspeed indicator
oO
oO
>
,
.
—
270°
-
TAS 106KT
OT
_—
Turn indicator
VOR 1
Slip/skid indicator
Horizontal situation indicator
270°
270°
XPDR 5537 IDNT LCL10:12:34
Turn rate indicator tick marks
OAT 6°C
VOR 1
oO
oO
INSET
PFD
OBS
CDI
DME
XPDR
IDENT
TMR/REF
NRST
ALERTS
-
Turn rate trend vector
Figure 8-12. Primary flight display (PFD). Note that the actual location of indications vary depending on manufacturers.
8-12

Turn Indicator
normal range, and caution range. [Figure 8-12] The number
value changes color to red when the airspeed exceeds VNE to
The turn indicator takes a slightly different form than the
warn the pilot of exceeding the maximum speed limitation.
traditional instrumentation. A sliding bar moves left and right
below the triangle to indicate deflection from coordinated
Attitude Indicator
flight. [Figure 8-12] Reference for coordinated flight comes
One improvement over analogue instrumentation is the
from accelerometers contained in the AHRS unit.
larger attitude indicator on EFD. The artificial horizon spans
Tachometer
the entire width of the PFD. [Figure 8-12] This expanded
instrumentation offers better reference through all phases of
The sixth instrument normally associated with the “six pack”
flight and all flight maneuvers. The attitude indicator receives
package is the tachometer. This is the only instrument that is
its information from the Attitude Heading and Reference
not located on the PFD. The tachometer is normally located
System (AHRS).
on the multi-function display (MFD). In the event of a display
screen failure, it is displayed on the remaining screen with
Altimeter
the PFD flight instrumentation. [Figure 8-13]
The altimeter is located on the right side of the PFD.
Slip/Skid Indicator
[Figure 8-12] As the altitude increases, the larger numbers
descend from the top of the display tape, with the current
The slip/skid indicator is the horizontal line below the roll
altitude being displayed in the black box in the center of the
pointer. [Figure 8-12] Like a ball in a turn-and-slip indicator,
display tape. The altitude is displayed in increments of 20 feet.
a bar width off center is equal to one ball width displacement.
Vertical Speed Indicator (VSI)
Turn Rate Indicator
The VSI is displayed to the right of the altimeter tape and can
The turn rate indicator, illustrated in Figure 8-12, is typically
take the form of an arced indicator or a vertical speed tape.
found directly above the rotating compass card. Tick marks to
[Figure 8-12] Both are equipped with a vertical speed bug.
the left and right of the lubber line denote the turn (standard-
rate versus half standard-rate). Typically denoted by a trend
Heading Indicator
line, if the trend vector is extended to the second tick mark
The heading indicator is located below the artificial horizon
the aircraft is in a standard-rate turn.
and is normally modeled after a Horizontal Situation
Indicator (HSI). [Figure 8-12] As in the case of the attitude
Individual panel displays can be configured for a variety
indicator, the heading indicator receives its information from
of aircraft by installing different software packages.
the magnetometer, which feeds information to the AHRS unit
[Figure 8-14] Manufacturers are also able to upgrade existing
and then out to the PFD.
instrument displays in a similar manner, eliminating the need
to replace individual gauges in order to upgrade.
an
ie) fatal) ba] ries Se @
=
tm BE |
||, re
gia
de = +:
=
i
“Kel
joke, PET
Be)
FiO) Pores S00. ae
ie
ee
LOS
Sggeiftcenineeoses LY 20. KOd ieee
ae
oe
ai
Pen)
e
oD
”
SS
|
D> (E™
Sy)>
‘
© Spossooeo fo eee me
lL
:
;
meen
(90000000
7?) 22
>
4°
EET
PiOhentt
Ee =
Figure 8-13. Multi-function display (MFD).
8-13

——
vassPies©
©
UY
. Pe
30.30
00:03:29
©
©}
I
A
UX
@
VS
2320B
Cc
W
S
N
E
€
MA239 5800’
IFR APPR
239 2.3NM
ANG
239 A
Army,
Figure 8-15. Teledyne’s 90004 TAS/Plus Air Data Computer (ADC)
computes air data information from the pitot-static pneumatic
a)
i)
system, aircraft temperature probe, and barometric correction
device to help create a clear picture of flight characteristics.
7 ee
does not enter a diaphragm. The ADC computes the received
+
B:
\
barometric pressure and sends a digital signal to the PFD to
display the proper altitude readout. EFDs also show trend
vectors, which show the pilot how the altitude and airspeed
are progressing.
Trend Vectors
S
Sa
eo
Trend vectors are magenta lines that move up and down both
the ASI and the altimeter. [Figures 8-16 and 8-17] The ADC
eed
@
Haae
@
computes the rate of change and displays the 6-second projection
of where the aircraft will be. Pilots can utilize the trend vectors
Figure 8-14. Chelton’s FlightLogic (top) and Avidyne’s Entegra
to better control the aircraft’s attitude. By including the trend
(bottom) are examples of panel displays that are configurable.
vectors in the instrument scan, pilots are able to precisely control
airspeed and altitude. Additional information can be obtained
Air Data Computer (ADC)
by referencing the Instrument Flying Handbook or specific
avionics manufacturer’s training material.
EFDs utilize the same type of instrument inputs as traditional
analogue gauges; however, the processing system is different.
The pitot static inputs are received by an ADC. The ADC
P,
Airspeed trend vector
computes the difference between the total pressure and the
static pressure and generates the information necessary to
display the airspeed on the PFD. Outside air temperatures
are also monitored and introduced into various components
within the system, as well as being displayed on the PFD
screen. [Figure 8-15]
The ADC is a separate solid state device that, in addition to
providing data to the PFD, is capable of providing data to the
autopilot control system. In the event of system malfunction, the
ADC can quickly be removed and replaced in order to decrease
downtime and decrease maintenance turn-around times.
Altitude information is derived from the static pressure port
TAS 120KT
just as an analogue system does; however, the static pressure
Figure 8-16. Airspeed trend vector.
8-14

the bicycle wheels increase speed, they become more stable in
Airspeed trend (increasing)
their plane of rotation. This is why a bicycle is unstable and
maneuverable at low speeds and stable and less maneuverable
at higher speeds.
Altitude trend vector
—a
By mounting this wheel, or gyroscope, on a set of gimbal
rings, the gyro is able to rotate freely in any direction. Thus,
-375
-500
if the gimbal rings are tilted, twisted, or otherwise moved,
the gyro remains in the plane in which it was originally
270°
-250
spinning. [Figure 8-18]
TAS 100KT
270°
Precession
VOR 1
-125
Precession is the tilting or turning of a gyro in response to a
Turn rate trend vector
deflective force. The reaction to this force does not occur at
the point at which it was applied; rather, it occurs at a point
that is 90° later in the direction of rotation. This principle
allows the gyro to determine a rate of turn by sensing the
Figure 4-27. Supporting Instruments
Figure 8-17. Altimeter trend vector.
amount of pressure created by a change in direction. The rate
at which the gyro precesses is inversely proportional to the
Gyroscopic Flight Instruments
speed of the rotor and proportional to the deflective force.
Several flight instruments utilize the properties of a gyroscope
Using the example of the bicycle, precession acts on the
for their operation. The most common instruments containing
wheels in order to allow the bicycle to turn. While riding
gyroscopes are the turn coordinator, heading indicator, and
at normal speed, it is not necessary to turn the handle bars
the attitude indicator. To understand how these instruments
in the direction of the desired turn. A rider simply leans in
operate requires knowledge of the instrument power systems,
the direction that he or she wishes to go. Since the wheels
gyroscopic principles, and the operating principles of each
are rotating in a clockwise direction when viewed from the
instrument.
right side of the bicycle, if a rider leans to the left, a force is
applied to the top of the wheel to the left. The force actually
Gyroscopic Principles
acts 90° in the direction of rotation, which has the effect of
Any spinning object exhibits gyroscopic properties. A wheel
applying a force to the front of the tire, causing the bicycle
or rotor designed and mounted to utilize these properties is
called a gyroscope. Two important design characteristics
~
of an instrument gyro are great weight for its size, or high
\\,
if
J
~
if
density, and rotation at high speed with low friction bearings.
{
_
|
~ |
There are two general types of mountings; the type used
»
|
depends upon which property of the gyro is utilized. A freely
or universally mounted gyroscope is free to rotate in any
~
direction about its center of gravity. Such a wheel is said to
y
have three planes of freedom. The wheel or rotor is free to
|
|
zi
\
~
i
ue
|
ii
~
rotate in any plane in relation to the base and is balanced so
if
}
:
»
that, with the gyro wheel at rest, it remains in the position
’
in which it is placed. Restricted or semi-rigidly mounted
Ss
gyroscopes are those mounted so that one of the planes of
|
|
freedom is held fixed in relation to the base.
f
—
fi
oY,
.\'
=
4)
~ |
SS
-
~
|
There are two fundamental properties of gyroscopic action:
rigidity in space and precession.
Rigidity in Space
Figure 8-18. Regardless of the position of its base, a gyro tends to
Rigidity in space refers to the principle that a gyroscope
remain rigid in space, with its axis of rotation pointed in a constant
remains in a fixed position in the plane in which it is spinning.
direction.
An example of rigidity in space is that of a bicycle wheel. As
8-15

to move to the left. There is a need to turn the handlebars at
low speeds because of the instability of the slowly turning
gyros and also to increase the rate of turn.
Precession can also create some minor errors in some
instruments. [Figure 8-19] Precession can cause a freely
spinning gyro to become displaced from its intended plane
of rotation through bearing friction, etc. Certain instruments
may require corrective realignment during flight, such as the
heading indicator.
Sources of Power
In some aircraft, all the gyros are vacuum, pressure, or
electrically operated. In other aircraft, vacuum or pressure
systems provide the power for the heading and attitude
indicators, while the electrical system provides the power for
the turn coordinator. Most aircraft have at least two sources
of power to ensure at least one source of bank information is
available if one power source fails. The vacuum or pressure
system spins the gyro by drawing a stream of air against the
rotor vanes to spin the rotor at high speed, much like the
operation of a waterwheel or turbine. The amount of vacuum
or pressure required for instrument operation varies, but is
usually between 4.5 "Hg and 5.5 "Hg.
One source of vacuum for the gyros is a vane-type engine-
driven pump that is mounted on the accessory case of the
engine. Pump capacity varies in different aircraft, depending
on the number of gyros.
A typical vacuum system consists of an engine-driven
vacuum pump, relief valve, air filter, gauge, and tubing
necessary to complete the connections. The gauge is mounted
in the aircraft’s instrument panel and indicates the amount
Plane of Rotation
Plane of Force
FORCE
_
Plane of Precession
/
————
|
oe
Figure 8-19. Precession of a gyroscope resulting from an applied
deflective force.
8-16
of pressure in the system (vacuum is measured in inches of
mercury less than ambient pressure).
As shown in Figure 8-20, air is drawn into the vacuum
system by the engine-driven vacuum pump. It first goes
through a filter, which prevents foreign matter from entering
the vacuum or pressure system. The air then moves through
the attitude and heading indicators where it causes the gyros
to spin. A relief valve prevents the vacuum pressure, or
suction, from exceeding prescribed limits. After that, the air
is expelled overboard or used in other systems, such as for
inflating pneumatic deicing boots.
It is important to monitor vacuum pressure during flight,
because the attitude and heading indicators may not provide
reliable information when suction pressure is low. The
vacuum, or suction, gauge is generally marked to indicate
the normal range. Some aircraft are equipped with a warning
light that illuminates when the vacuum pressure drops below
the acceptable level.
When the vacuum pressure drops below the normal operating
range, the gyroscopic instruments may become unstable and
inaccurate. Cross-checking the instruments routinely is a
good habit to develop.
Turn Indicators
Aircraft use two types of turn indicators: turn-and-slip
indicators and turn coordinators. Because of the way the gyro
is mounted, the turn-and-slip indicator shows only the rate of
turn in degrees per second. The turn coordinator is mounted
at an angle, or canted, so it can initially show roll rate. When
the roll stabilizes, it indicates rate of turn. Both instruments
indicate turn direction and quality (coordination), and also
serve as a backup source of bank information in the event an
attitude indicator fails. Coordination is achieved by referring
to the inclinometer, which consists of a liquid-filled curved
tube with a ball inside. [Figure 8-21]
Turn-and-Slip Indicator
The gyro in the turn-and-slip indicator rotates in the vertical
plane corresponding to the aircraft’s longitudinal axis. A
single gimbal limits the planes in which the gyro can tilt,
and a spring works to maintain a center position. Because of
precession, a yawing force causes the gyro to tilt left or right,
as viewed from the pilot seat. The turn-and-slip indicator
uses a pointer, called the turn needle, to show the direction
and rate of turn. The turn-and-slip indicator is incapable of
“tumbling” off its rotational axis because of the restraining
springs. When extreme forces are applied to a gyro, the gyro
is displaced from its normal plane of rotation, rendering its
indications invalid. Certain instruments have specific pitch
and bank limits that induce a tumble of the gyro.

[ J
_
_
Vacuum relief valve
Heading indicator
Overboard vent line
ST
I2
I5
2I
>
Vacuum pump
>
—
|
,
20 20
I0 I0
OT
“
a
I0 I0
@
20 20
i
|
_
—
TEST
STBY PWR
—__
-
SUCTION
INCHES MERCURT
I0
Suction
Attitude indicator
gauge
——
Vacuum air filter
es
Figure 8-20. Typical vacuum system.
Turn Coordinator
aircraft with the turn index. Figure 8-22 shows a picture of a
turn coordinator. There are two marks on each side (left and
The gimbal in the turn coordinator is canted; therefore, its
right) of the face of the instrument. The first mark is used to
gyro can sense both rate of roll and rate of turn. Since turn
reference a wings level zero rate of turn. The second mark
coordinators are more prevalent in training aircraft, this
on the left and right side of the instrument serve to indicate
discussion concentrates on that instrument. When rolling into
a standard rate of turn. A standard-rate turn is defined as a
or out of a turn, the miniature aircraft banks in the direction
turn rate of 3° per second. The turn coordinator indicates only
the aircraft is rolled. A rapid roll rate causes the miniature
the rate and direction of turn; it does not display a specific
aircraft to bank more steeply than a slow roll rate.
angle of bank.
The turn coordinator can be used to establish and maintain
a standard-rate turn by aligning the wing of the miniature
Horizontal gyro
Gimbal rotation
-
wt
wt
=
P
a
Gimbal
Gyro rotation
P
Gimbal rotation
c
—
_
Gyro rotation
_
~~
_
~
a
—
——
_
|
|
.
”
\
_-
a
—
.
Fa
_~
-
-
|
>
NY
+
~
—
,
"
‘\
~
_—
Canted gyro
Standard rate turn index
—
—
Standard rate turn index
Inclinometer
Inclinometer
Turn coordinator
Turn-and-slip indicator
Figure 8-21. Turn indicators rely on controlled precession for their operation.
8-17

to the center of the wind screen. When in coordinated flight,
the string trails straight back over the top of the wind screen.
al
»
al
»
P~
=
D.C.
D.C.
When the aircraft is either slipping or skidding, the yaw
ELEC.
ELEC.
string moves to the right or left depending on the direction
of slip or skid.
TURN COORDINATOR
TURN COORDINATOR
L
R
L
R
Instrument Check
2 MIN.
2 MIN.
NO PITCH
NO PITCH
INFORMATION
INFORMATION
During preflight, ensure that the inclinometer is full of fluid
ei
and has no air bubbles. The ball should also be resting at
Slipping turn
Skidding turn
its lowest point. When taxiing, the turn coordinator should
indicate a turn in the correct direction while the ball moves
al
P~_
»
opposite the direction of the turn.
D.C.
ELEC.
Attitude Indicator
The attitude indicator, with its miniature aircraft and horizon
TURN COORDINATOR
L
R
bar, displays a picture of the attitude of the aircraft. The
2 MIN.
NO PITCH
relationship of the miniature aircraft to the horizon bar is
INFORMATION
the same as the relationship of the real aircraft to the actual
Coordinated turn
horizon. The instrument gives an instantaneous indication of
even the smallest changes in attitude.
Figure 8-22. If inadequate right rudder is applied in a right turn,
The gyro in the attitude indicator is mounted in a horizontal
a slip results. Too much right rudder causes the aircraft to skid
plane and depends upon rigidity in space for its operation.
through the turn. Centering the ball results in a coordinated turn.
The horizon bar represents the true horizon. This bar is
fixed to the gyro and remains in a horizontal plane as the
Inclinometer
aircraft is pitched or banked about its lateral or longitudinal
The inclinometer is used to depict aircraft yaw, which is
axis, indicating the attitude of the aircraft relative to the true
the side-to-side movement of the aircraft’s nose. During
horizon. [Figure 8-23]
coordinated, straight-and-level flight, the force of gravity
causes the ball to rest in the lowest part of the tube, centered
The gyro spins in the horizontal plane and resists deflection
between the reference lines. Coordinated flight is maintained
of the rotational path. Since the gyro relies on rigidity in
by keeping the ball centered. If the ball is not centered, it can
space, the aircraft actually rotates around the spinning gyro.
be centered by using the rudder.
Bank index
To center the ball, apply rudder pressure on the side to
Gimbal rotation
which the ball is deflected. Use the simple rule, “step on the
ball,” to remember which rudder pedal to press. If aileron
—
J
and rudder are coordinated during a turn, the ball remains
Z
j
centered in the tube. If aerodynamic forces are unbalanced,
,
20 20
20 20
the ball moves away from the center of the tube. As shown
I0 I0
I0 I0
_
—
|
_
_
in Figure 8-22, in a slip, the rate of turn is too slow for the
'
-
-
a
I0 I0
I0 I0
angle of bank, and the ball moves to the inside of the turn. In
20 20
20 20
a skid, the rate of turn is too great for the angle of bank, and
i
TEST
the ball moves to the outside of the turn. To correct for these
STBY PWR
conditions, and improve the quality of the turn, remember to
“step on the ball.” Varying the angle of bank can also help
Roll gimbal
Horizon reference arm
restore coordinated flight from a slip or skid. To correct for a
slip, decrease bank and/or increase the rate of turn. To correct
Gyro
Pitch gimbal
for a skid, increase the bank and/or decrease the rate of turn.
Figure 8-23. Attitude indicator.
Yaw String
One additional tool that can be added to the aircraft is a yaw
string. A yaw string is simply a string or piece of yarn attached
8-18

Every pilot should be able to interpret the banking scale
An adjustment knob is provided with which the pilot may move
illustrated in Figure 8-24. Most banking scale indicators on the
the miniature aircraft up or down to align the miniature aircraft with
top of the instrument move in the same direction from that in
the horizon bar to suit the pilot’s line of vision. Normally, the
which the aircraft is actually banked. Some other models move
miniature aircraft is adjusted so that the wings overlap the horizon
bar when the aircraft is in straight-and-level cruising flight.
in the opposite direction from that in which the aircraft is
actually banked. This may confuse the pilot if the indicator is used
to determine the direction of bank. This scale should be used only
The pitch and bank limits of an attitude indicator depend upon
to control the degree of desired bank. The relationship of the
the make and model of the instrument. Some attitude indicators
miniature aircraft to the horizon bar should be used for an indication
have limits in the banking plane from 100° to 110°, and the pitch
of the direction of bank. The attitude indicator is reliable and the
limits can be from 60° to 70°. For those attitude indicators that
most realistic flight instrument on the instrument panel. Its
display only pitch information of +/- 25° vertically, the
indications are very close approximations of the actual attitude of
instrument could "peg" (stop) and remain at this pitch indication
the aircraft.
until the pitch no longer exceeds limitation or "tumble" and
provide erroneous pitch and bank indications when the aircraft
exceeds these limits. This may be extremely hazardous when the
Heading Indicator
aircraft is operating in instrument meteorological conditions or
The heading indicator is fundamentally a mechanical
confuse a pilot during an unusual attitude recovery. A number of
instrument designed to facilitate the use of the magnetic
modern attitude indicators do not have this problem.
compass. Errors in the magnetic compass are numerous,
>
>
J
>
>
>
,
|
I
,
,
™
wz
~oF
-
“=
20 20
aw
I0
~~
I0
ww
I0 I0
I0
I0
I0
I0
I0
I0 I0
I0
“=
a
20 20
wz
a
J
a
TEST
STBY PWR
TEST
STBY PWR
TEST
STBY PWR
-
-
—
Ft
~
|
wt
ff
fs
__
|=
Straight climb
Climbing right bank
Climbing left bank
Pointer
>
>
B
10°
>
a
>
20°
n
aaa
k
>
,
|
_
s
30°
>
c
al
~oF
z=
-
y
,
e
i
“=
.
a
we
45°
I0
~~
I0
I0
I0
I0
I0
-
60°
I0
I0
wa
“=
wz
a
I0 I0
a
90°
TEST
STBY PWR
TEST
STBY PWR
—
-
__)
I0 I0
_—
>
a
y
NN
—_
_
a
™—
TEST
STBY PWR
,
_
G
Level left bank
Level right bank
Adjustment knob
Artificial horizon
>
>
J
>
>
>
,
,
|
,
.
20 20
-
“=
I0
we
I0
I0 I0
I0
I0
I0
I0
-
I0 I0
I0
I0
“=
i
20 20
yy
J
J
TEST
TEST
TEST
STBY PWR
STBY PWR
STBY PWR
-
-
-
|
=
_—
SF
Descending left bank
Straight descent
Descending right bank
Figure 8-24. Attitude representation by the attitude indicator corresponds to the relation of the aircraft to the real horizon.
8-19

Attitude and Heading Reference System (AHRS)
making straight flight and precision turns to headings difficult
to accomplish, particularly in turbulent air. A heading
Electronic flight displays have replaced free-spinning gyros
indicator, however, is not affected by the forces that make
with solid-state laser systems that are capable of flight at
the magnetic compass difficult to interpret. [Figure 8-25]
any attitude without tumbling. This capability is the result
of the development of the Attitude and Heading Reference
The operation of the heading indicator depends upon the
System (AHRS).
principle of rigidity in space. The rotor turns in a vertical
plane and fixed to the rotor is a compass card. Since the rotor
The AHRS sends attitude information to the PFD in order
remains rigid in space, the points on the card hold the same
to generate the pitch and bank information of the attitude
position in space relative to the vertical plane of the gyro. The
indicator. The heading information is derived from a
aircraft actually rotates around the rotating gyro, not the other
magnetometer that senses the earth’s lines of magnetic flux.
way around. As the instrument case and the aircraft revolve
This information is then processed and sent out to the PFD
around the vertical axis of the gyro, the card provides clear
to generate the heading display. [Figure 8-26]
and accurate heading information.
The Flux Gate Compass System
Because of precession caused by friction, the heading
As mentioned earlier, the lines of flux in the Earth’s magnetic
indicator creeps or drifts from its set position. Among
field have two basic characteristics: a magnet aligns with
other factors, the amount of drift depends largely upon the
them, and an electrical current is induced, or generated, in
condition of the instrument. If the bearings are worn, dirty,
any wire crossed by them.
or improperly lubricated, the drift may be excessive. Another
error in the heading indicator is caused by the fact that the
The flux gate compass that drives slaved gyros uses the
gyro is oriented in space, and the Earth rotates in space at a
characteristic of current induction. The flux valve is a small,
rate of 15° in 1 hour. Thus, discounting precession caused
segmented ring, like the one in Figure 8-27, made of soft iron
by friction, the heading indicator may indicate as much as
that readily accepts lines of magnetic flux. An electrical coil
15° error per every hour of operation.
is wound around each of the three legs to accept the current
induced in this ring by the Earth’s magnetic field. A coil
Some heading indicators referred to as horizontal situation
wound around the iron spacer in the center of the frame has
indicators (HSI) receive a magnetic north reference from
400 Hz alternating current (AC) flowing through it. During
a magnetic slaving transmitter and generally need no
the times when this current reaches its peak, twice during
adjustment. The magnetic slaving transmitter is called
each cycle, there is so much magnetism produced by this
a magnetometer.
coil that the frame cannot accept the lines of flux from the
Earth’s field.
Main drive gear
Compass card gear
Gimbal rotation
.
.
—
-
—
~
Wl
—
y
—
I2
|
_
I5
2I
_
-
SY
Adjustment gears
Gimbal
Gyro
Adjustment knob
Figure 8-25. A heading indicator displays headings based on a 360°
Figure 8-26. Attitude and heading reference system (AHRS).
azimuth, with the final zero omitted. For example, “6” represents
060°, while “21” indicates 210°. The adjustment knob is used to
align the heading indicator with the magnetic compass.
8-20

(c)
-
Figure 8-27. The soft iron frame of the flux valve accepts the flux from
the Earth’s magnetic field each time the current in the center coil
Figure 3-23. The soft iron frame of the flux valve accepts the
reverses. This flux causes current to flow in the three pickup coils.
flux from the Earth’s magnetic field each time the current in the
center coil reverse. This flux causes current to flow in the three
picked coils.
As the current reverses between the peaks, it demagnetizes
the frame so it can accept the flux from the Earth’s field. As
this flux cuts across the windings in the three coils, it causes
current to flow in them. These three coils are connected in
such a way that the current flowing in them changes as the
heading of the aircraft changes. [Figure 8-28]
The three coils are connected to three similar but smaller
coils in a synchro inside the instrument case. The synchro
rotates the dial of a radio magnetic indicator (RMI) or a HSI.
(0)
(©)
|
Figure 8-28. The current in each of the three pickup coils changes
with the heading of the aircraft.
Figure 3-24. The current in each of the three pickup coils
changes with the heading of the aircraft.
Remote Indicating Compass
Remote indicating compasses were developed to compensate
for the errors and limitations of the older type of heading
indicators. The two panel-mounted components of a typical
system are the pictorial navigation indicator and the slaving
control and compensator unit. [Figure 8-29] The pictorial
navigation indicator is commonly referred to as an HSI.
The slaving control and compensator unit has a push button
that provides a means of selecting either the “slaved gyro”
or “free gyro” mode. This unit also has a slaving meter
and two manual heading-drive buttons. The slaving meter
indicates the difference between the displayed heading and
the magnetic heading. A right deflection indicates a clockwise
error of the compass card; a left deflection indicates a
counterclockwise error. Whenever the aircraft is in a turn
and the card rotates, the slaving meter shows a full deflection
to one side or the other. When the system is in “free gyro”
mode, the compass card may be adjusted by depressing the
appropriate heading-drive button.
A separate unit, the magnetic slaving transmitter, is mounted
remotely, usually in a wingtip to eliminate the possibility of
magnetic interference. It contains the flux valve, which is
the direction-sensing device of the system. A concentration
of lines of magnetic force, after being amplified, becomes
e
e
VU
,
Qe fe
ph eS
Zs
/
eS
Lifln & wy
A
SANS
am,
2V:
y
“
- \
e+
Liiitiiit
é
.
Figure 8-29. Pictorial navigation indicator (HSI, top), slaving meter
(lower right), and slaving control compensator unit (lower left).
8-21

a signal relayed to the heading indicator unit, which is also
or “spills” and no longer gives the correct indication until
remotely mounted. This signal operates a torque motor in
reset. After spilling, it may be reset with the caging knob.
the heading indicator unit that processes the gyro unit until
Many of the modern instruments used are designed in such
it is aligned with the transmitter signal. The magnetic slaving
a manner so that they do not tumble.
transmitter is connected electrically to the HSI.
An additional precession error may occur due to a gyro not
There are a number of designs of the remote indicating
spinning fast enough to maintain its alignment. When the
compass; therefore, only the basic features of the system are
vacuum system stops producing adequate suction to maintain
covered here. Instrument pilots must become familiar with
the gyro speed, the heading indicator and the attitude indicator
the characteristics of the equipment in their aircraft.
gyros begin to slow down. As they slow, they become more
susceptible to deflection from the plane of rotation. Some
As instrument panels become more crowded and the pilot’s
aircraft have warning lights to indicate that a low vacuum
available scan time is reduced by a heavier flight deck
situation has occurred. Other aircraft may have only a vacuum
workload, instrument manufacturers have worked toward
gauge that indicates the suction.
combining instruments. One good example of this is the
Instrument Check
RMI in Figure 8-30. The compass card is driven by signals
from the flux valve, and the two pointers are driven by an
As the gyro spools up, make sure there are no abnormal
automatic direction finder (ADF) and a very high frequency
sounds. While taxiing, the instrument should indicate turns in
(VHF) omni-directional radio range (VOR).
the correct direction, and precession should be normal. At idle
power settings, the gyroscopic instruments using the vacuum
Heading indicators that do not have this automatic
system might not be up to operating speeds and precession
northseeking capability are called “free” gyros and require
might occur more rapidly than during flight.
periodic adjustment. It is important to check the indications
Angle of Attack Indicators
frequently (approximately every 15 minutes) and reset the
heading indicator to align it with the magnetic compass
The purpose of an AOA indicator is to give the pilot better
when required. Adjust the heading indicator to the magnetic
situational awareness pertaining to the aerodynamic health
compass heading when the aircraft is straight and level at a
of the airfoil. This can also be referred to as stall margin
constant speed to avoid compass errors.
awareness. More simply explained, it is the margin that exists
between the current AOA that the airfoil is operating at, and
The bank and pitch limits of the heading indicator vary
the AOA at which the airfoil will stall (critical AOA).
with the particular design and make of instrument. On some
heading indicators found in light aircraft, the limits are
Speed by itself is not a reliable parameter to avoid a stall.
approximately 55° of pitch and 55° of bank. When either of
An airplane can stall at any speed. Angle of attack is a better
these attitude limits is exceeded, the instrument “tumbles”
parameter to use to avoid a stall. For a given configuration,
the airplane always stalls at the same AOA, referred to as
the critical AOA. This critical AOA does not change with:
Co
la
:
•
Weight
yo
Ll, /, 7
ae
Aa
•
Bank Angle
•
Temperature
~
‘ee
wi
Se
•
Density Altitude
S
==
•
Center of Gravity
a,
=
|
An AOA indicator can have several benefits when installed in
‘-
RN
So
area mw i
General Aviation aircraft, not the least of which is increased
situational awareness. Without an AOA indicator, the AOA
J
is “invisible” to pilots. These devices measure several
°
n
parameters simultaneously and determine the current AOA
providing a visual image to the pilot of the current AOA along
with representations of the proximity to the critical AOA.
Figure 8-30. Driven by signals from a flux valve, the compass card
[Figure 8-31] These devices can give a visual representation
in this RMI indicates the heading of the aircraft opposite the upper
of the energy management state of the airplane. The energy
center index mark. The green pointer is driven by the ADF.
8-22

—
aaa
I\
© dm @ Mh &dme
Figure 8-31. Angle of attack indicators.
state of an airplane is the balance between airspeed, altitude,
drag, and thrust and represents how efficiently the airfoil is
operating.
Compass Systems
The Earth is a huge magnet, spinning in space, surrounded
by a magnetic field made up of invisible lines of flux. These
lines leave the surface at the magnetic North Pole and reenter
at the magnetic South Pole.
Lines of magnetic flux have two important characteristics:
any magnet that is free to rotate will align with them, and
an electrical current is induced into any conductor that cuts
across them. Most direction indicators installed in aircraft
make use of one of these two characteristics.
Magnetic Compass
One of the oldest and simplest instruments for indicating
direction is the magnetic compass. It is also one of the basic
instruments required by Title 14 of the Code of Federal
Regulations (14 CFR) part 91 for both VFR and IFR flight.
A magnet is a piece of material, usually a metal containing
iron, that attracts and holds lines of magnetic flux. Regardless
of size, every magnet has two poles: north and south. When
one magnet is placed in the field of another, the unlike poles
attract each other, and like poles repel.
An aircraft magnetic compass, such as the one in Figure 8-32,
has two small magnets attached to a metal float sealed inside a
bowl of clear compass fluid similar to kerosene. A graduated
scale, called a card, is wrapped around the float and viewed
through a glass window with a lubber line across it. The card
is marked with letters representing the cardinal directions,
north, east, south, and west, and a number for each 30°
between these letters. The final “0” is omitted from these
directions. For example, 3 = 30°, 6 = 60°, and 33 = 330°.
—-
—
°°
aa
—
——
=
UA
=
OF
=
ohms
des Seq
-
ply
ou an
\
e
e
L
There are long and short graduation marks between the letters
and numbers, each long mark representing 10° and each short
mark representing 5°.
The float and card assembly has a hardened steel pivot in its
center that rides inside a special, spring-loaded, hard glass
jewel cup. The buoyancy of the float takes most of the weight
off of the pivot, and the fluid damps the oscillation of the
float and card. This jewel-and-pivot type mounting allows the
float freedom to rotate and tilt up to approximately 18° angle
of bank. At steeper bank angles, the compass indications are
erratic and unpredictable.
The compass housing is entirely full of compass fluid. To
prevent damage or leakage when the fluid expands and
contracts with temperature changes, the rear of the compass
case is sealed with a flexible diaphragm, or with a metal
bellows in some compasses.
The magnets align with the Earth’s magnetic field and the
pilot reads the direction on the scale opposite the lubber
line. Note that in Figure 8-32, the pilot views the compass
a
;
_
a
-
_
J
"
_
_
| |
E-W
N-S
|
_
Figure 8-32. A magnetic compass. The vertical line is called the
lubber line.
8-23

card from its backside. When the pilot is flying north, as the
the two poles are aligned, and there is no variation. East
compass indicates, east is to the pilot’s right. On the card,
of this line, the magnetic North Pole is to the west of the
“33,” which represents 330° (west of north), is to the right of
geographic North Pole and a correction must be applied to
north. The reason for this apparent backward graduation is
a compass indication to get a true direction.
that the card remains stationary, and the compass housing and
the pilot rotate around it. Because of this setup, the magnetic
Flying in the Washington, D.C., area, for example, the
compass can be confusing to read.
variation is 10° west. If a pilot wants to fly a true course of
south (180°), the variation must be added to this, resulting in
Magnetic Compass Induced Errors
a magnetic course of 190° to fly. Flying in the Los Angeles,
California area, the variation is 14° east. To fly a true course
The magnetic compass is the simplest instrument in
of 180° there, the pilot would have to subtract the variation
the panel, but it is subject to a number of errors that must
and fly a magnetic course of 166°. The variation error does
be considered.
not change with the heading of the aircraft; it is the same
anywhere along the isogonic line.
Variation
The Earth rotates about its geographic axis; maps and charts
Deviation
are drawn using meridians of longitude that pass through the
The magnets in a compass align with any magnetic field.
geographic poles. Directions measured from the geographic
Some causes for magnetic fields in aircraft include flowing
poles are called true directions. The magnetic North Pole to
electrical current, magnetized parts, and conflict with the
which the magnetic compass points is not collocated with
Earth’s magnetic field. These aircraft magnetic fields create
the geographic North Pole, but is some 1,300 miles away;
a compass error called deviation.
directions measured from the magnetic poles are called
magnetic directions. In aerial navigation, the difference
Deviation, unlike variation, depends on the aircraft heading.
between true and magnetic directions is called variation. This
Also unlike variation, the aircraft’s geographic location
same angular difference in surveying and land navigation is
does not affect deviation. While no one can reduce or
called declination.
change variation error, an aviation maintenance technician
(AMT) can provide the means to minimize deviation error
Figure 8-33 shows the isogonic lines that identify the number
by performing the maintenance task known as “swinging
of degrees of variation in their area. The line that passes near
the compass.”
Chicago is called the agonic line. Anywhere along this line
165˚W
150˚W
135˚W
120˚W
105˚W
90˚W
75˚W
60˚W
45˚W
30˚W
15˚W
0˚
15˚E
30˚E
45˚E
60˚E
75˚E
90˚E
105˚E
120˚E
135˚E
150˚E
165˚E
180˚W
180˚W
-40
70˚N
70˚N
m’ ¢
ee
-10
-10
—
-30
60˚N
60˚N
-20
-10
45˚N
45˚N
i
&
30˚N
30˚N
15˚N
15˚N
-10
-10
-20
0˚
0˚
-10
15˚S
15˚S
-20
-30
30˚S
30˚S
S|
Main field declination (D)
Contour interval:
2 degrees
45˚S
45˚S
-60
red contours positive (east)
blue negative (west)
-70
pink (agonic) zero line.
-90
Mercator Projection.
J
-80
60˚N
60˚N
-100
-130
Position of dip poles
-120
-110
-50
-30
-40
-20
70˚N
70˚N
180˚W
180˚W
15˚E
30˚E
45˚E
60˚E
75˚E
90˚E
105˚E
120˚E
135˚E
150˚E
165˚E
165˚W
150˚W
135˚W
120˚W
105˚W
90˚W
75˚W
60˚W
45˚W
30˚W
15˚W
0˚
Figure 8-33. Isogonic lines are lines of equal variation.
8-24

To swing the compass, an AMT positions the aircraft
FOR
000.
on a series of known headings, usually at a compass
STEER
rose. [Figure 8-34] A compass rose consists of a series
RDO.ON
00/
O62
1/23
RDO.OFF
002.
03!)
O94
125/57
of lines marked every 30° on an airport ramp, oriented to
magnetic north. There is minimal magnetic interference at
FOR
the compass rose. The pilot or the AMT, if authorized, can
STEER
RDO.ON
(76
2/0
27/
2%
taxi the aircraft to the compass rose and maneuver the aircraft
RDO.OFF
/74
to the headings prescribed by the AMT.
Figure 8-35. A compass correction card shows the deviation
As the aircraft is “swung” or aligned to each compass rose
correction for any heading.
heading, the AMT adjusts the compensator assembly located
on the top or bottom of the compass. The compensator
Step 1: Determine the Magnetic Course
assembly has two shafts whose ends have screwdriver slots
True Course (180°) ± Variation (+10°) = Magnetic Course
accessible from the front of the compass. Each shaft rotates
(190°)
one or two small compensating magnets. The end of one shaft
is marked E-W, and its magnets affect the compass when the
The magnetic course (190°) is steered if there is no deviation
aircraft is pointed east or west. The other shaft is marked
error to be applied. The compass card must now be considered
N-S and its magnets affect the compass when the aircraft is
for the compass course of 190°.
pointed north or south.
Step 2: Determine the Compass Course
The adjustments position the compensating magnets to
Magnetic Course (190°, from step 1) ± Deviation (–2°, from
minimize the difference between the compass indication and
correction card) = Compass Course (188°)
the actual aircraft magnetic heading. The AMT records any
remaining error on a compass correction card like the one
NOTE: Intermediate magnetic courses between those listed
in Figure 8-35 and places it in a holder near the compass.
on the compass card need to be interpreted. Therefore, to
Only AMTs can adjust the compass or complete the compass
steer a true course of 180°, the pilot would follow a compass
correction card. Pilots determine and fly compass headings
course of 188°.
using the deviation errors noted on the card. Pilots must also
note the use of any equipment causing operational magnetic
To find the true course that is being flown when the compass
interference such as radios, deicing equipment, pitot heat,
course is known:
radar, or magnetic cargo.
Compass Course ± Deviation = Magnetic Course ±
Variation= True Course
The corrections for variation and deviation must be applied
in the correct sequence as shown below, starting from the
Dip Errors
true course desired.
The Earth's magnetic field runs parallel to its surface only at
the Magnetic Equator, which is the point halfway between
f
the Magnetic North and South Poles. As you move away
True north
from the Magnetic Equator towards the magnetic poles, the
angle created by the vertical pull of the Earth's magnetic field
N
in relation to the Earth’s surface increases gradually. This
angle is known as the dip angle. The dip angle increases in
a downward direction as you move towards the Magnetic
W
North Pole and increases in an upward direction as you move
towards the Magnetic South Pole.
E
If the compass needle were mounted so that it could pivot
freely in three dimensions, it would align itself with the
S
magnetic field, pointing up or down at the dip angle in the
direction of local Magnetic North. Because the dip angle is
Figure 8-34. Utilization of a compass rose aids compensation for
of no navigational interest, the compass is made so that it can
deviation errors.
8-25

rotate only in the horizontal plane. This is done by lowering
Southerly Turning Errors
the center of gravity below the pivot point and making the
When turning in a southerly direction, the forces are such that
assembly heavy enough that the vertical component of the
the compass float assembly lags rather than leads. The result
magnetic force is too weak to tilt it significantly out of the
is a false southerly turn indication. The compass card, or float
horizontal plane. The compass can then work effectively at
assembly, should be allowed to pass the desired heading prior
all latitudes without specific compensation for dip. However,
to stopping the turn. As with the northerly error, this error
close to the magnetic poles, the horizontal component of
is amplified with the proximity to either magnetic pole. To
the Earth’s field is too small to align the compass which
correct this lagging error, the aircraft should be allowed to
makes the compass unusable for navigation. Because of this
pass the desired heading prior to stopping the turn. The same
constraint, the compass only indicates correctly if the card
rule of 15 degrees plus half of the latitude applies here (i.e.,
is horizontal. Once tilted out of the horizontal plane, it will
if the aircraft is being operated in a position near 30 degrees
be affected by the vertical component of the Earth’s field
latitude, the turn should be stopped 15+15=30 degrees after
which leads to the following discussions on northerly and
passing the desired heading). [Figure 8-36B]
southerly turning errors.
Acceleration Error
Northerly Turning Errors
The magnetic dip and the forces of inertia cause magnetic
The center of gravity of the float assembly is located lower
compass errors when accelerating and decelerating on
than the pivotal point. As the aircraft turns, the force that
easterly and westerly headings. Because of the pendulous-
results from the magnetic dip causes the float assembly to
type mounting, the aft end of the compass card is tilted
swing in the same direction that the float turns. The result is
upward when accelerating and downward when decelerating
a false northerly turn indication. Because of this lead of the
during changes of airspeed. When accelerating on either
compass card, or float assembly, a northerly turn should be
an easterly or westerly heading, the error appears as a
stopped prior to arrival at the desired heading. This compass
turn indication toward north. When decelerating on either
error is amplified with the proximity to either magnetic pole.
of these headings, the compass indicates a turn toward
One rule of thumb to correct for this leading error is to stop
south. A mnemonic, or memory jogger, for the effect of
the turn 15 degrees plus half of the latitude (i.e., if the aircraft
acceleration error is the word “ANDS” (Acceleration-
is being operated in a position near 40 degrees latitude, the
North/Deceleration-South) may help you to remember the
turn should be stopped 15+20=35 degrees prior to the desired
acceleration error. [Figure 8-37] Acceleration causes an
heading). [Figure 8-36A]
OO
Left turn
Right turn
No error
—_
A
DIP
DIP
DIP
@&
a
Ea
i
.
/
=
N
N
t
t
N
c
c
D
D
fe
fe
D
ip
ip
ef
ef
R
e
e
A
C
p
p
C
A
ff
ff
Di
Di
R
ec
ec
D
t
t
OO
|
B
Left turn
Right turn
No error
DIP
DIP
&
DIP
&
a
i
rs
;
/
=
\
y
D
D
t
t
c
c
S
S
ip
ip
fe
fe
D
S
ef
ef
R
e
e
C
A
p
p
A
ff
ff
C
R
Di
Di
ec
ec
D
t
t
Figure 8-36. Northerly and southerly turning errors.
8-26

h
t
u
o
S
, 5
. 3
NORTH
-
i
f
N
_
»
J
-
-
~~
P~
J
GS
W
E
™~
NAV
S
OBS
J
J
al
J
f
View is from the pilot’s
™~
perspective, and the
movable card is reset
after each turn.
Figure 8-37. The effects of acceleration error.
Figure 3-21. The effects of acceleration error.
indication toward north; deceleration causes an indication
se
ei
r
s
. |
in
toward south.
N
a
Oscillation Error
Oscillation is a combination of all of the errors previously
mentioned and results in fluctuation of the compass card in
W
E
-
relation to the actual heading direction of the aircraft. When
setting the gyroscopic heading indicator to agree with the
magnetic compass, use the average indication between the
S
swings.
ei
ei
-_
a
The Vertical Card Magnetic Compass
f
t
The vertical card magnetic compass eliminates some of the
errors and confusion encountered with the magnetic compass.
The dial of this compass is graduated with letters representing
Figure 8-38. Vertical card magnetic compass.
the cardinal directions, numbers every 30°, and tick marks
every 5°. The dial is rotated by a set of gears from the shaft-
Eddy Current Damping
mounted magnet, and the nose of the symbolic aircraft on
In the case of a vertical card magnetic compass, flux from
the instrument glass represents the lubber line for reading the
the oscillating permanent magnet produces eddy currents in
heading of the aircraft from the dial. [Figure 8-38]
a damping disk or cup. The magnetic flux produced by the
eddy currents opposes the flux from the permanent magnet
Lags or Leads
and decreases the oscillations.
When starting a turn from a northerly heading, the compass
lags behind the turn. When starting a turn from a southerly
heading, the compass leads the turn.
8-27

Outside Air Temperature (OAT) Gauge
The outside air temperature (OAT) gauge is a simple and
effective device mounted so that the sensing element is
exposed to the outside air. The sensing element consists
of a bimetallic-type thermometer in which two dissimilar
materials are welded together in a single strip and twisted
into a helix. One end is anchored into protective tube and the
other end is affixed to the pointer, which reads against the
calibration on a circular face. OAT gauges are calibrated in
degrees °C, °F, or both. An accurate air temperature provides
the pilot with useful information about temperature lapse rate
with altitude change. [Figure 8-39]
Chapter Summary
Flight instruments enable an aircraft to be operated with
maximum performance and enhanced safety, especially when
flying long distances. Manufacturers provide the necessary
flight instruments, but to use them effectively, pilots need
to understand how they operate. As a pilot, it is important to
become very familiar with the operational aspects of the pitot-
static system and associated instruments, the vacuum system
and associated instruments, the gyroscopic instruments, and
the magnetic compass.
8-28
-20
-20
_
-40
-40
C
-60
F
Figure 8-39. Outside air temperature (OAT) gauge.