Chapter 10
IFR Flight
IFR Flight
P|
Introduction
This chapter is a discussion of conducting a flight under
instrument flight rules (IFR). It also explains the sources for
flight planning, the conditions associated with instrument
flight, and the procedures used for each phase of IFR flight:
departure, en route, and approach. The chapter concludes
with an example of an IFR flight that applies many of the
procedures discussed in the chapter.
10-1

Sources of Flight Planning Information
The following resources are available for a pilot planning a
flight conducted under IFR.
National Aeronautical Navigation Products (AeroNav
Products) Group publications:
•
IFR en route charts
•
Area charts
•
United States Terminal Procedures Publications (TPP)
The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) publications:
•
Aeronautical Information Manual (AIM)
•
Airport/Facility Directory (A/FD)
•
Notices to Airmen Publication (NTAP) for flight
planning in the National Airspace System (NAS)
Pilots should also consult the Pilot’s Operating Handbook/
Airplane Flight Manual (POH/AFM) for flight planning
information pertinent to the aircraft to be flown.
A review of the contents of all the listed publications helps
determine which material should be referenced for each flight.
As a pilot becomes more familiar with these publications, the
flight planning process becomes quicker and easier.
Aeronautical Information Manual (AIM)
The AIM provides the aviation community with basic
flight information and air traffic control (ATC) procedures
used in the United States NAS. An international version
called the Aeronautical Information Publication contains
parallel information, as well as specific information on the
international airports used by the international community.
Airport/Facility Directory (A/FD)
The A/FD contains information on airports, communications,
and navigation aids (NAVAIDs) pertinent to IFR flight. It
also includes very-high frequency omnidirectional range
(VOR) receiver checkpoints, flight service station (FSS),
weather service telephone numbers, and air route traffic
control center (ARTCC) frequencies. Various special
notices essential to flight are also included, such as land-
and-hold-short operations (LAHSO) data, the civil use of
military fields, continuous power facilities, and special
flight procedures.
In the major terminal and en route environments, preferred
routes have been established to guide pilots in planning their
routes of flight, to minimize route changes, and to aid in the
orderly management of air traffic using the Federal airways.
The A/FD lists both high and low altitude preferred routes.
10-2
Notices to Airmen Publication (NTAP)
The NTAP is a publication containing current Notices to
Airmen (NOTAMs) that are essential to the safety of flight,
as well as supplemental data affecting the other operational
publications listed. It also includes current Flight Data Center
(FDC) NOTAMs, which are regulatory in nature, issued to
establish restrictions to flight or to amend charts or published
instrument approach procedures (IAPs).
POH/AFM
The POH/AFM contain operating limitations, performance,
normal and emergency procedures, and a variety of other
operational information for the respective aircraft. Aircraft
manufacturers have done considerable testing to gather and
substantiate the information in the aircraft manual. Pilots should
refer to it for information relevant to a proposed flight.
IFR Flight Plan
As specified in Title 14 of the Code of Federal Regulations
(14 CFR) part 91, no person may operate an aircraft in
controlled airspace under IFR unless that person has filed
an IFR flight plan. Flight plans may be submitted to the
nearest FSS or air traffic control tower (ATCT) either in
person, by telephone (1-800-WX-BRIEF), by computer
(using the direct user access terminal system (DUATS)),
or by radio if no other means are available. Pilots should
file IFR flight plans at least 30 minutes prior to estimated
time of departure to preclude possible delay in receiving a
departure clearance from ATC. The AIM provides guidance
for completing and filing FAA Form 7233-1, Flight Plan.
These forms are available at flight service stations (FSSs)
and are generally found in flight planning rooms at airport
terminal buildings. [Figure 10-1]
Filing in Flight
IFR flight plans may be filed from the air under various
conditions, including:
1.
A flight outside controlled airspace before proceeding
into IFR conditions in controlled airspace.
2.
A visual flight rules (VFR) flight expecting IFR
weather conditions en route in controlled airspace.
In either of these situations, the flight plan may be filed with
the nearest FSS or directly with the ARTCC. A pilot who
files with the FSS submits the information normally entered
during preflight filing, except for “point of departure,”
together with present position and altitude. FSS then relays
this information to the ARTCC. The ARTCC then clears the
pilot from present position or from a specified navigation fix.

are understood. In order to complete the communication —
Figure 10-1. Flight plan form.
A pilot who files directly with the ARTCC reports present
position and altitude, and submits only the flight plan
information normally relayed from the FSS to the ARTCC.
Be aware that traffic saturation frequently prevents ARTCC
personnel from accepting flight plans by radio. In such
cases, a pilot is advised to contact the nearest FSS to file
the flight plan.
Cancelling IFR Flight Plans
An IFR flight plan may be cancelled any time a pilot is
operating in VFR conditions outside Class A airspace by
stating “cancel my IFR flight plan” to the controller or air-to-
ground station. After cancelling an IFR flight plan, the pilot
should change to the appropriate air-to-ground frequency,
transponder code as directed, and VFR altitude/flight level.
ATC separation and information services (including radar
services, where applicable) are discontinued when an IFR
flight plan is cancelled. If VFR radar advisory service is
desired, a pilot must specifically request it. Be aware that
other procedures may apply when cancelling an IFR flight
plan within areas such as Class C or Class B airspace.
When operating on an IFR flight plan to an airport with
an operating control tower, a flight plan is cancelled
automatically upon landing. If operating on an IFR flight
Figure 10-1. Flight plan from.
plan to an airport without an operating control tower, the
pilot is responsible for cancelling the flight plan. This can
be done by telephone after landing if there is no operating
FSS or other means of direct communications with ATC.
When there is no FSS or air-to-ground communications are
not possible below a certain altitude, a pilot may cancel an
IFR flight plan while still airborne and able to communicate
with ATC by radio. If using this procedure, be certain the
remainder of the flight can be conducted under VFR. It is
essential that IFR flight plans be cancelled expeditiously. This
allows other IFR traffic to utilize the airspace.
Clearances
An ATC clearance allows an aircraft to proceed under
specified traffic conditions within controlled airspace
for the purpose of providing separation between known
aircraft. A major contributor to runway incursions is lack
of communication with ATC and not understanding the
instructions that they give. The primary way the pilot and
ATC communicate is by voice. The safety and efficiency
of taxi operations at airports with operating control towers
depend on this communication loop. ATC uses standard
phraseology and require readbacks and other responses from
the pilot in order to verify that clearances and instructions
10-3

loop, the controllers must also clearly understand the pilot’s
readback and other responses. Pilots can help enhance the
controller’s understanding by responding appropriately and
using standard phraseology. Regulatory requirements, the
AIM, approved flight training programs, and operational
manuals provide information for pilots on standard ATC
phraseology and communications requirements.
Examples
A flight filed for a short distance at a relatively low altitude
in an area of low traffic density might receive a clearance
as follows:
“Cessna 1230 Alpha, cleared to Doeville airport direct,
cruise 5,000.”
The term “cruise” in this clearance means a pilot is authorized
to fly at any altitude from the minimum IFR altitude up to
and including 5,000 feet and may level off at any altitude
within this block of airspace. A climb or descent within the
block may be made at the pilot’s discretion. However, once
a pilot reports leaving an altitude within the block, the pilot
may not return to that altitude without further ATC clearance.
When ATC issues a cruise clearance in conjunction with
an unpublished route, an appropriate crossing altitude is
specified to ensure terrain clearance until the aircraft reaches a
fix, point, or route where the altitude information is available.
The crossing altitude ensures IFR obstruction clearance to
the point at which the aircraft enters a segment of a published
route or IAP.
Once a flight plan is filed, ATC issues the clearance with
appropriate instructions, such as the following:
“Cessna 1230 Alpha is cleared to Skyline airport via
the Crossville 055 radial, Victor 18, maintain 5,000.
Clearance void if not off by 1330.”
Or a more complex clearance, such as:
“Cessna 1230 Alpha is cleared to Wichita Mid-
continent airport via Victor 77, left turn after takeoff,
proceed direct to the Oklahoma City VORTAC.
Hold west on the Oklahoma City 277 radial, climb to
5,000 in holding pattern before proceeding on course.
Maintain 5,000 to CASHION intersection. Climb to
and maintain 7,000. Departure control frequency will
be 121.05, Squawk 0412.”
Clearance delivery may issue the following “abbreviated
clearance” which includes a departure procedure (DP):
“Cessna 1230 Alpha, cleared to La Guardia as filed,
RINGOES 8 departure Phillipsburg transition,
10-4
maintain 8,000. Departure control frequency will be
120.4, Squawk 0700.”
This clearance may be readily copied in shorthand as follows:
“CAF RNGO8 PSB M80 DPC 120.4 SQ 0700.”
The information contained in this DP clearance is abbreviated
using clearance shorthand (see appendix 1). The pilot should
know the locations of the specified navigation facilities,
together with the route and point-to-point time, before
accepting the clearance.
The DP enables a pilot to study and understand the details
of a departure before filing an IFR flight plan. It provides
the information necessary to set up communication and
navigation equipment and be ready for departure before
requesting an IFR clearance.
Once the clearance is accepted, a pilot is required to comply
with ATC instructions. A clearance different from that issued
may be requested if the pilot considers another course of
action more practicable or if aircraft equipment limitations
or other considerations make acceptance of the clearance
inadvisable.
A pilot should also request clarification or amendment, as
appropriate, any time a clearance is not fully understood
or considered unacceptable for safety of flight. The pilot
is responsible for requesting an amended clearance if ATC
issues a clearance that would cause a pilot to deviate from
a rule or regulation or would place the aircraft in jeopardy.
Clearance Separations
ATC provides the pilot on an IFR clearance with separation
from other IFR traffic. This separation is provided:
1.
Vertically—by assignment of different altitudes.
2.
Longitudinally—by controlling time separation
between aircraft on the same course.
3.
Laterally—by assignment of different flightpaths.
4.
By radar—including all of the above.
ATC does not provide separation for an aircraft operating:
1.
Outside controlled airspace.
2.
On an IFR clearance:
a) With “VFR-On-Top” authorized instead of a
specific assigned altitude.
b) Specifying climb or descent in “VFR conditions.”
c) At any time in VFR conditions, since uncontrolled
VFR flights may be operating in the same
airspace.

In addition to heading and altitude assignments, ATC
occasionally issues speed adjustments to maintain the
required separations. For example:
“Cessna 30 Alpha, slow to 100 knots.”
A pilot who receives speed adjustments is expected to
maintain that speed plus or minus 10 knots. If for any reason
the pilot is not able to accept a speed restriction, the pilot
should advise ATC.
At times, ATC may also employ visual separation techniques
to keep aircraft safely separated. A pilot who obtains visual
contact with another aircraft may be asked to maintain visual
separation or to follow the aircraft. For example:
“Cessna 30 Alpha, maintain visual separation with
that traffic, climb and maintain 7,000.”
The pilot’s acceptance of instructions to maintain visual
separation or to follow another aircraft is an acknowledgment
that the aircraft is maneuvered as necessary to maintain safe
separation. It is also an acknowledgment that the pilot accepts
the responsibility for wake turbulence avoidance.
In the absence of radar contact, ATC relies on position reports
to assist in maintaining proper separation. Using the data
transmitted by the pilot, the controller follows the progress of
each flight. ATC must correlate the pilots’ reports to provide
separation; therefore, the accuracy of each pilot’s report can
affect the progress and safety of every other aircraft operating
in the area on an IFR flight plan.
Departure Procedures (DPs)
Instrument departure procedures are preplanned IFR
procedures that provide obstruction clearance from the
terminal area to the appropriate en route structure and provide
the pilot with a way to depart the airport and transition to the
en route structure safely. Pilots operating under 14 CFR part
91 are strongly encouraged to file and fly a DP when one is
available. [Figure 10-2]
There are two types of DPs: Obstacle Departure Procedures
(ODP), printed either textually or graphically, and Standard
Instrument Departures (SID), always printed graphically. All
DPs, either textual or graphic, may be designed using either
conventional or area navigation (RNAV) criteria. RNAV
procedures have RNAV printed in the title (e.g., SHEAD
TWO DEPARTURE (RNAV)).
Obstacle Departure Procedures (ODP)
ODPs provide obstruction clearance via the least onerous
route from the terminal area to the appropriate en route
structure. ODPs are recommended for obstruction clearance
and may be flown without ATC clearance unless an
alternate departure procedure (SID or radar vector) has
been specifically assigned by ATC. Graphic ODPs have
(OBSTACLE) printed in the procedure title (e.g., GEYSR
THREE DEPARTURE (OBSTACLE), CROWN ONE
DEPARTURE (RNAV)(OBSTACLE)).
Standard Instrument Departures
SIDs are ATC procedures printed for pilot/controller use in
graphic form to provide obstruction clearance and a transition
from the terminal area to the appropriate en route structure.
SIDs are primarily designed for system enhancement and to
reduce pilot/controller workload. ATC clearance must be
received prior to flying a SID.
ODPs are found in section C of each booklet published
regionally by the AeroNav Products, TPP, along with “IFR
Take-off Minimums” while SIDs are collocated with the
approach procedures for the applicable airport. Additional
information on the development of DPs can be found in
paragraph 5-2-7 of the AIM. However, the following points
are important to remember.
1.
The pilot of IFR aircraft operating from locations
where DP procedures are effective may expect an ATC
clearance containing a DP. The use of a DP requires
pilot possession of at least the textual description of
the approved DP.
2.
If a pilot does not possess a preprinted DP or for
any other reason does not wish to use a DP, he or
she is expected to advise ATC. Notification may
be accomplished by filing “NO DP” in the remarks
section of the filed flight plan or by advising ATC.
3.
If a DP is accepted in a clearance, a pilot must comply
with it.
Radar-Controlled Departures
On IFR departures from airports in congested areas, a pilot
normally receives navigational guidance from departure
control by radar vector. When a departure is to be vectored
immediately following takeoff, the pilot is advised before
takeoff of the initial heading to be flown. This information is
vital in the event of a loss of two-way radio communications
during departure.
The radar departure is normally simple. Following takeoff,
contact departure control on the assigned frequency when
advised to do so by the control tower. At this time, departure
control verifies radar contact and gives headings, altitude, and
climb instructions to move an aircraft quickly and safely out
of the terminal area. A pilot is expected to fly the assigned
headings and altitudes until informed by the controller of
the aircraft’s position with respect to the route given in
10-5

a
SE-4, 16 DEC 2010 to 13 JAN 2011
Figure 10-2. Departure procedure (DP).
the clearance, whom to contact next, and to “resume own
navigation.”
Departure control provides vectors to either a navigation
facility, or an en route position appropriate to the departure
clearance, or transfer to another controller with further radar
surveillance capabilities. [Figure 10-2]
10-6
Figure 10-2. Departure procedure (DP).
A radar controlled departure does not relieve the pilot of
responsibilities as pilot-in-command. Be prepared before
takeoff to conduct navigation according to the ATC clearance
with navigation receivers checked and properly tuned. While
under radar control, monitor instruments to ensure continuous
orientation to the route specified in the clearance and record
the time over designated checkpoints.
SE-4, 16 DEC 2010 to 13 JAN 2011

Departures From Airports Without an Operating
Control Tower
When departing from airports that have neither an operating
tower nor an FSS, a pilot should telephone the flight plan
to the nearest ATC facility at least 30 minutes before the
estimated departure time. If weather conditions permit, depart
VFR and request IFR clearance as soon as radio contact is
established with ATC.
If weather conditions make it undesirable to fly VFR,
telephone clearance request. In this case, the controller would
probably issue a short-range clearance pending establishment
of radio contact and might restrict the departure time to a
certain period. For example:
“Clearance void if not off by 0900.”
This would authorize departure within the allotted period and
permit a pilot to proceed in accordance with the clearance. In
the absence of any specific departure instructions, a pilot would
be expected to proceed on course via the most direct route.
En Route Procedures
Procedures en route vary according to the proposed route,
the traffic environment, and the ATC facilities controlling
the flight. Some IFR flights are under radar surveillance and
controlled from departure to arrival and others rely entirely
on pilot navigation.
Where ATC has no jurisdiction, it does not issue an IFR
clearance. It has no control over the flight, nor does the pilot
have any assurance of separation from other traffic.
ATC Reports
All pilots are required to report unforecast weather conditions
or other information related to safety of flight to ATC. The
pilot-in-command of each aircraft operated in controlled
airspace under IFR shall report as soon as practical to
ATC any malfunctions of navigational, approach, or
communication equipment occurring in flight:
1.
Loss of VOR, tactical air navigation (TACAN) or
automatic direction finder (ADF) receiver capability.
2.
Complete or partial loss of instrument landing system
(ILS) receiver capability.
3.
Impairment of air-to-ground communications
capability.
The pilot-in-command shall include within the report
(1) aircraft identification, (2) equipment affected, (3) degree
to which the pilot to operate under IFR within the ATC
system is impaired, and (4) nature and extent of assistance
desired from ATC.
Position Reports
Position reports are required over each compulsory reporting
point (shown on the chart as a solid triangle) along the route
being flown regardless of altitude, including those with
a VFR-on-top clearance. Along direct routes, reports are
required of all IFR flights over each point used to define
the route of flight. Reports at reporting points (shown as an
open triangle) are made only when requested by ATC. A
pilot should discontinue position reporting over designated
reporting points when informed by ATC that the aircraft
is in “RADAR CONTACT.” Position reporting should be
resumed when ATC advises “RADAR CONTACT LOST”
or “RADAR SERVICE TERMINATED.”
Position reports should include the following items:
1.
Identification
2.
Position
3.
Time
4.
Altitude or flight level (include actual altitude or flight
level when operating on a clearance specifying VFR-
on-top)
5.
Type of flight plan (not required in IFR position reports
made directly to ARTCCs or approach control)
6.
Estimated time of arrival (ETA) and name of next
reporting point
7.
The name only of the next succeeding reporting point
along the route of flight
8.
Pertinent remarks
En route position reports are submitted normally to
the ARTCC controllers via direct controller-to-pilot
communications channels using the appropriate ARTCC
frequencies listed on the en route chart.
Whenever an initial contact with a controller is to be followed
by a position report, the name of the reporting point should
be included in the call-up. This alerts the controller that such
information is forthcoming. For example:
“Atlanta Center, Cessna 1230 Alpha at JAILS
intersection.”
“Cessna 1230 Alpha Atlanta Center.”
“Atlanta Center, Cessna 1230 Alpha at JAILS
intersection, 5,000, estimating Monroeville at 1730.”
Additional Reports
In addition to required position reports, the following reports
should be made to ATC without a specific request.
1. At all times:
10-7

a) When vacating any previously assigned altitude
or flight level for a newly assigned altitude or
flight level
b) When an altitude change is made if operating on
a clearance specifying VFR-on-top
c) When unable to climb/descend at a rate of at least
500 feet per minute (fpm)
d) When an approach has been missed (Request
clearance for specific action (to alternative
airport, another approach, etc.))
e) Change in average true airspeed (at cruising
altitude) when it varies by 5 percent or 10 knots
(whichever is greater) from that filed in the flight
plan
f)
The time and altitude upon reaching a holding fix
or point to which cleared
g) When leaving any assigned holding fix or point
NOTE: The reports in (f) and (g) may be omitted
by pilots of aircraft involved in instrument
training at military terminal area facilities when
radar service is being provided.
h) Any loss in controlled airspace of VOR,
TACAN, ADF, low frequency navigation
receiver capability, global positioning system
(GPS) anomalies while using installed IFR-
certified GPS/Global Navigation Satellite
Systems (GNSS) receivers, complete or partial
loss of ILS receiver capability, or impairment of
air/ground communications capability. Reports
should include aircraft identification, equipment
affected, degree to which the capability to operate
under IFR in the ATC system is impaired, and
the nature and extent of assistance desired from
ATC.
i)
Any information relating to the safety of flight.
2.
When not in radar contact:
a) When leaving the final approach fix inbound on
final approach (nonprecision approach), or when
leaving the outer marker or fix used in lieu of the
outer marker inbound on final approach (precision
approach).
b) A corrected estimate at any time it becomes
apparent that an estimate as previously submitted
is in error in excess of 3 minutes.
Any pilot who encounters weather conditions that have not
been forecast, or hazardous conditions which have been
forecast, is expected to forward a report of such weather to
ATC.
10-8
Planning the Descent and Approach
ATC arrival procedures and flight deck workload are affected
by weather conditions, traffic density, aircraft equipment,
and radar availability.
When landing at an airport with approach control services and
where two or more IAPs are published, information on the
type of approach to expect is provided in advance of arrival
or vectors are provided to a visual approach. This information
is broadcast either on automated terminal information
service (ATIS) or by a controller. It is not furnished when
the visibility is 3 miles or more and the ceiling is at or above
the highest initial approach altitude established for any low
altitude IAP for the airport.
The purpose of this information is to help the pilot plan arrival
actions; however, it is not an ATC clearance or commitment
and is subject to change. Fluctuating weather, shifting
winds, blocked runway, etc., are conditions that may result
in changes to the approach information previously received.
It is important for a pilot to advise ATC immediately if he
or she is unable to execute the approach or prefers another
type of approach.
If the destination is an airport without an operating control
tower and has automated weather data with broadcast
capability, the pilot should monitor the automated surface
observing system/automated weather observing system
(ASOS/AWOS) frequency to ascertain the current weather for
the airport. ATC should be advised that weather information
has been received and what the pilot’s intentions are.
When the approach to be executed has been determined, the
pilot should plan for and request a descent to the appropriate
altitude prior to the initial approach fix (IAF) or transition
route depicted on the IAP. When flying the transition route,
a pilot should maintain the last assigned altitude until ATC
gives the instructions “cleared for the approach.” Lower
altitudes can be requested to bring the transition route
altitude closer to the required altitude at the initial approach
fix. When ATC uses the phrase “at pilot’s discretion” in the
altitude information of a clearance, the pilot has the option
to start a descent at any rate and may level off temporarily
at any intermediate altitude. However, once an altitude has
been vacated, return to that altitude is not authorized without
a clearance. When ATC has not used the term “at pilot’s
discretion” nor imposed any descent restrictions, initiate
descent promptly upon acknowledgment of the clearance.
Descend at an optimum rate (consistent with the operating
characteristics of the aircraft) to 1,000 feet above the assigned
altitude. Then attempt to descend at a rate of between 500 and
1,500 fpm until the assigned altitude is reached. If at anytime

Standard Terminal Arrival Routes (STARs)
a pilot is unable to maintain a descent rate of at least 500 fpm,
advise ATC. Also advise ATC if it is necessary to level off
Standard Terminal Arrival Routes (STARs) (as described
at an intermediate altitude during descent. An exception to
in Chapter 1) have been established to simplify clearance
this is when leveling off at 10,000 feet mean sea level (MSL)
delivery procedures for arriving aircraft at certain areas
on descent or 2,500 feet above airport elevation (prior to
having high density traffic. A STAR serves a purpose
entering a Class B, Class C, or Class D surface area) when
parallel to that of a DP for departing traffic. [Figure 10-3]
required for speed reduction.
SC-4, 16 DEC 2010 to 13 JAN 2011
Figure 10-3. Standard terminal arrival route (STAR).
Figure 10-3. Standard terminal arrival route (STAR).
SC-4, 16 DEC 2010 to 13 JAN 2011
10-9

The following points regarding STARs are important to
remember:
1.
All STARs are contained in the Terminal Procedures
Publication (TPP), along with the IAP charts for the
destination airport. The AIM also describes STAR
procedures.
2.
If the destination is a location for which STARs
have been published, a pilot may be issued a
clearance containing a STAR whenever ATC deems
it appropriate. To accept the clearance, a pilot must
possess at least the approved textual description.
3.
It is the pilot’s responsibility to either accept or refuse
an issued STAR. If a STAR will not or cannot be used,
advise ATC by placing “NO STAR” in the remarks
section of the filed flight plan or by advising ATC.
4.
If a STAR is accepted in a clearance, compliance is
mandatory.
Substitutes for Inoperative or Unusable
Components
The basic ground components of an ILS are the localizer,
glideslope, outer marker, middle marker, and inner marker
(when installed). A compass locator or precision radar may
be substituted for the outer or middle marker. Distance
measuring equipment (DME), VOR, or nondirectional
beacon (NDB) fixes authorized in the standard IAP or
surveillance radar may be substituted for the outer marker.
Additionally, IFR-certified GPS equipment, operated in
accordance with Advisory Circular (AC) 90-94, Guidelines
for Using Global Positioning System Equipment for IFR
En Route and Terminal Operations and for Nonprecision
Instrument Approaches in the United States National
Airspace System, may be substituted for ADF and DME
equipment, except when flying NDB IAP. Specifically, GPS
can be substituted for ADF and DME equipment when:
1.
Flying a DME arc;
2.
Navigating TO/FROM an NDB;
3.
Determining the aircraft position over an NDB;
4.
Determining the aircraft position over a fix made up
of a crossing NDB bearing;
5.
Holding over an NDB;
6.
Determining aircraft position over a DME fix.
Holding Procedures
Depending upon traffic and weather conditions, holding may
be required. Holding is a predetermined maneuver that keeps
aircraft within a specified airspace while awaiting further
clearance from ATC. A standard holding pattern uses right
10-10
turns, and a nonstandard holding pattern uses left turns. The
ATC clearance always specifies left turns when a nonstandard
pattern is to be flown.
Standard Holding Pattern (No Wind)
In a standard holding pattern with no winds [Figure 10-4], the
aircraft follows the specified course inbound to the holding
fix, turns 180° to the right, flies a parallel straight course
outbound for 1 minute, turns 180° to the right, and flies the
inbound course to the fix.
Abeam
-
SI
Figure 10-4. Standard holding pattern—no wind.
Figure 10-4. Standard holding pattern - no winid.
Standard Holding Pattern (With Wind)
A standard symmetrical holding pattern cannot be flown
when winds exist. In those situations, the pilot is expected to:
1.
Compensate for the effect of a known wind except
when turning.
Adjust outbound timing to achieve a 1-minute (11⁄2
2.
minutes above 14,000 feet) inbound leg.
Figure 10-5 illustrates the holding track followed with a left
crosswind. The effect of wind is counteracted by applying
drift corrections to the inbound and outbound legs and by
applying time allowances to the outbound leg.
Holding Instructions
If an aircraft arrives at a clearance limit before receiving
clearance beyond the fix, ATC expects the pilot to maintain
the last assigned altitude and begin holding in accordance
with the charted holding pattern. If no holding pattern is
charted and holding instructions have not been issued, enter
a standard holding pattern on the course on which the aircraft
approached the fix and request further clearance as soon as
possible. Normally, when no delay is anticipated, ATC issues
holding instructions at least 5 minutes before the estimated
arrival at the fix. Where a holding pattern is not charted, the
ATC clearance specifies the following:
1.
Direction of holding from the fix in terms of the eight
cardinal compass points (N, NE, E, SE, etc.)

#
is
iva
—|
Figure 10-5. Drift correction in holding pattern.
2.
Holding fix (the fix may be omitted if included at the
beginning of the transmission as the clearance limit)
3.
Radial, course, bearing, airway, or route on which the
aircraft is to hold.
4.
Leg length in miles if DME or RNAV is to be used
(leg length is specified in minutes on pilot request or
if the controller considers it necessary).
5.
Direction of turn, if left turns are to be made, because
the pilot requests or the controller considers it
necessary.
6.
Time to expect-further-clearance (EFC) and any
pertinent additional delay information.
ATC instructions are also issued whenever:
1.
It is determined that a delay will exceed 1 hour.
2.
A revised EFC is necessary.
3.
In a terminal area having a number of NAVAIDs
and approach procedures, a clearance limit may not
indicate clearly which approach procedures will
be used. On initial contact, or as soon as possible
thereafter, approach control advises the pilot of the
type of approach to expect.
4.
Ceiling and/or visibility is reported as being at or
below the highest “circling minimums” established
for the airport concerned. ATC transmits a report of
current weather conditions and subsequent changes,
as necessary.
5.
An aircraft is holding while awaiting approach
clearance, and the pilot advises ATC that reported
weather conditions are below minimums applicable
to the operation. In this event, ATC issues suitable
instructions to aircraft desiring either to continue
holding while awaiting weather improvement or
proceed to another airport.
Standard Entry Procedures
The entry procedures given in the AIM evolved from
extensive experimentation under a wide range of operational
conditions. The standardized procedures should be followed
to ensure that an aircraft remains within the boundaries of
the prescribed holding airspace.
When a speed reduction is required, start the reduction when
3 minutes or less from the holding fix. Cross the holding fix
initially at or below the maximum holding airspeed (MHA).
The purpose of the speed reduction is to prevent overshooting
the holding airspace limits, especially at locations where
adjacent holding patterns are close together.
All aircraft may hold at the following altitudes and maximum
holding airspeeds:
Altitude Mean Sea Level (MSL) Airspeed (KIAS)
Up to 6,000 feet
6,001 – 14,000 feet
14,001 feet and above
The following are exceptions to the maximum holding
airspeeds:
1.
Holding patterns from 6,001 to 14,000 feet may
be restricted to a maximum airspeed of 210 knots
indicated airspeed (KIAS). This nonstandard pattern
is depicted by an icon.
2.
Holding patterns may be restricted to a maximum
airspeed of 175 KIAS. This nonstandard pattern is
depicted by an icon. Holding patterns restricted to
175 KIAS are generally found on IAPs applicable to
category A and B aircraft only.
3.
Holding patterns at Air Force airfields only—310
KIAS maximum, unless otherwise depicted.
4.
Holding patterns at Navy airfields only—230 KIAS
maximum, unless otherwise depicted.
5.
The pilot of an aircraft unable to comply with
maximum airspeed restrictions should notify ATC.
10-11

While other entry procedures may enable the aircraft to
enter the holding pattern and remain within protected
airspace, the parallel, teardrop, and direct entries are the
procedures for entry and holding recommended by the
FAA. Additionally, paragraph 5-3-7 in the AIM should be
reviewed. [Figure 10-6]
1.
Parallel Procedure. When approaching the holding fix
from anywhere in sector (a), fly to the fix. Afterwards,
turn to a heading to parallel the holding course
outbound. Fly outbound for 1 minute, turn in the
direction of the holding pattern through more than
180°, and return to the holding fix or intercept the
holding course inbound.
2.
Teardrop Procedure. When approaching the holding
fix from anywhere in sector (b), the teardrop entry
procedure would be to fly to the fix, turn outbound to
a heading for a 30° teardrop entry within the pattern
(on the holding side) for a period of 1 minute, then
turn in the direction of the holding pattern to intercept
the inbound holding course.
3.
Direct Entry Procedure. When approaching the
holding fix from anywhere in sector (c), the direct
entry procedure would be to fly directly to the fix and
turn to follow the holding pattern.
-“
|
a
-_
_
c
b
Figure 10-6. Holding pattern entry procedures.
A pilot should make all turns during entry and while holding at:
Figure 10-6. Holding pattern entry procedures.
1.
3° per second, or
2.
30° bank angle, or
3.
A bank angle provided by a flight director system.
Time Factors
The holding pattern entry time reported to ATC is the initial
time of arrival over the fix. Upon entering a holding pattern, the
initial outbound leg is flown for 1 minute at or below 14,000
feet MSL, and for 11⁄2 minutes above 14,000 feet MSL. Timing
10-12
for subsequent outbound legs should be adjusted as necessary
to achieve proper inbound leg time. The pilot should begin
outbound timing over or abeam the fix, whichever occurs later.
If the abeam position cannot be determined, start timing when
the turn to outbound is completed. [Figure 10-7]
, 4
045°
»s
315°
0°
, )
330°
Ya
240°
\
330°
a
240°
>
‘
Figure 10-7. Holding—outbound timing.
Figure 10-7. Holding -outbound timing

Time leaving the holding fix must be known to ATC before
succeeding aircraft can be cleared to the vacated airspace.
Leave the holding fix:
1.
When ATC issues either further clearance en route or
approach clearance;
2.
As prescribed in 14 CFR part 91 (for IFR operations;
two-way radio communications failure, and
responsibility and authority of the pilot-in-command);
or
3.
After the IFR flight plan has been cancelled, if the
aircraft is holding in VFR conditions.
DME Holding
The same entry and holding procedures apply to DME
holding, but distances (nautical miles) are used instead of
time values. The length of the outbound leg is specified by
the controller, and the end of this leg is determined by the
DME readout.
Approaches
Compliance With Published Standard Instrument
Approach Procedures
Compliance with the approach procedures shown on the
approach charts provides necessary navigation guidance
information for alignment with the final approach courses,
as well as obstruction clearance. Under certain conditions,
a course reversal maneuver or procedure turn may be
necessary. However, this procedure is not authorized when:
1.
The symbol “NoPT” appears on the approach course
on the plan view of the approach chart.
2.
Radar vectoring is provided to the final approach
course.
3.
A holding pattern is published in lieu of a procedure
turn.
4.
Executing a timed approach from a holding fix.
5.
Otherwise directed by ATC.
Instrument Approaches to Civil Airports
Unless otherwise authorized, when an instrument letdown to
an airport is necessary, the pilot should use a standard IAP
prescribed for that airport. IAPs are depicted on IAP charts
and are found in the TPP.
ATC approach procedures depend upon the facilities available
at the terminal area, the type of instrument approach executed,
and the existing weather conditions. The ATC facilities,
NAVAIDs, and associated frequencies appropriate to each
standard instrument approach are given on the approach
chart. Individual charts are published for standard approach
procedures associated with the following types of facilities:
1.
Nondirectional beacon (NDB)
2.
Very-high frequency omnirange (VOR)
3.
Very-high frequency omnirange with distance
measuring equipment (VORTAC or VOR/DME)
4.
Localizer (LOC)
5.
Instrument landing system (ILS)
6.
Localizer-type directional aid (LDA)
7.
Simplified directional facility (SDF)
8.
Area navigation (RNAV)
9.
Global positioning system (GPS)
An IAP can be flown in one of two ways: as a full approach
or with the assistance of radar vectors. When the IAP is flown
as a full approach, pilots conduct their own navigation using
the routes and altitudes depicted on the instrument approach
chart. A full approach allows the pilot to transition from
the en route phase, to the instrument approach, and then to
a landing with minimal assistance from ATC. This type of
procedure may be requested by the pilot but is most often
used in areas without radar coverage. A full approach also
provides the pilot with a means of completing an instrument
approach in the event of a communications failure.
When an approach is flown with the assistance of radar
vectors, ATC provides guidance in the form of headings and
altitudes, which position the aircraft to intercept the final
approach. From this point, the pilot resumes navigation,
intercepts the final approach course, and completes the
approach using the IAP chart. This is often a more expedient
method of flying the approach, as opposed to the full
approach, and allows ATC to sequence arriving traffic. A
pilot operating in radar contact can generally expect the
assistance of radar vectors to the final approach course.
Approach to Airport Without an Operating Control
Tower
Figure 10-8 shows an approach procedure at an airport
without an operating control tower. When approaching
such a facility, the pilot should monitor the AWOS/ASOS
if available for the latest weather conditions. When direct
communication between the pilot and controller is no
longer required, the ARTCC or approach controller issues a
clearance for an instrument approach and advises “change to
advisory frequency approved.” When the aircraft arrives on
a “cruise” clearance, ATC does not issue further clearance
for approach and landing.
If an approach clearance is required, ATC authorizes the pilots
to execute his or her choice of standard instrument approach
(if more than one is published for the airport) with the
10-13

a
SE-4, 16 DEC 2010 to 13 JAN 2011
Figure 10-8. Approach: an approach procedure at an airport without an operating control tower.
Figure 10-8. Monroeville, Alabama (MVC) VOR or GPS Rwy 3 Approach: An approach procedure at an airport without an operating
control tower.
10-14
SE-4, 16 DEC 2010 to 13 JAN 2011

phrase “Cleared for the approach” and the communications
frequency change required, if any. From this point on, there
is no contact with ATC. The pilot is responsible for closing
the IFR flight plan before landing, if in VFR conditions, or
by telephone after landing.
Unless otherwise authorized by ATC, a pilot is expected to
execute the complete IAP shown on the chart.
Approach to Airport With an Operating Tower,
With No Approach Control
When an aircraft approaches an airport with an operating
control tower, but no approach control, ATC issues a
clearance to an approach/outer fix with the appropriate
information and instructions as follows:
1.
Name of the fix
2.
Altitude to be maintained
3.
Holding information and expected approach clearance
time, if appropriate
4.
Instructions regarding further communications,
including:
a) facility to be contacted
b) time and place of contact
c) frequency/ies to be used
If ATIS is available, a pilot should monitor that frequency
for information such as ceiling, visibility, wind direction and
velocity, altimeter setting, instrument approach, and runways
in use prior to initial radio contact with the tower. If ATIS is
not available, ATC provides weather information from the
nearest reporting station.
Approach to an Airport With an Operating Tower,
With an Approach Control
Where radar is approved for approach control service, it is
used to provide vectors in conjunction with published IAPs.
Radar vectors can provide course guidance and expedite
traffic to the final approach course of any established IAP.
Figure 10-9 shows an IAP chart with maximum ATC
facilities available.
Approach control facilities that provide this radar service
operate in the following manner:
1.
Arriving aircraft are either cleared to an outer fix most
appropriate to the route being flown with vertical
separation and, if required, given holding information;
or,
2.
When radar hand-offs are effected between ARTCC
and approach control, or between two approach
control facilities, aircraft are cleared to the airport or
to a fix so located that the hand-off is completed prior
to the time the aircraft reaches the fix.
a) When the radar hand-offs are utilized, successive
arriving flights may be handed off to approach
control with radar separation in lieu of vertical
separation.
b) After hand-off to approach control, an aircraft
is vectored to the appropriate final approach
course.
3.
Radar vectors and altitude/flight levels are issued
as required for spacing and separating aircraft; do
not deviate from the headings issued by approach
control.
4.
Aircraft are normally informed when it becomes
necessary to be vectored across the final approach
course for spacing or other reasons. If approach
course crossing is imminent and the pilot has not
been informed that the aircraft will be vectored across
the final approach course, the pilot should query the
controller. The pilot is not expected to turn inbound on
the final approach course unless an approach clearance
has been issued. This clearance is normally issued with
the final vector for interception of the final approach
course, and the vector enables the pilot to establish the
aircraft on the final approach course prior to reaching
the final approach fix.
5.
Once the aircraft is established inbound on the final
approach course, radar separation is maintained with
other aircraft, and the pilot is expected to complete
the approach using the NAVAID designated in the
clearance (ILS, VOR, NDB, GPS, etc.) as the primary
means of navigation.
6.
After passing the final approach fix inbound, the
pilot is expected to proceed direct to the airport and
complete the approach or to execute the published
missed approach procedure.
7.
Radar service is automatically terminated when the
landing is completed or when the pilot is instructed to
change to advisory frequency at uncontrolled airports,
whichever occurs first.
Radar Approaches
With a radar approach, the pilot receives course and altitude
guidance from a controller who monitors the progress of the
flight with radar. This is an option should the pilot experience
an emergency or distress situation.
The only airborne radio equipment required for radar
approaches is a functioning radio transmitter and receiver.
10-15

SC-4, 16 DEC 2010 to 13 JAN 2011
Figure 10-9. Gulfport, Mississippi (GPT) ILS or LOC Rwy 14 Approach: An instrument procedure chart with maximum ATC facilities
Figure 10-9. Approach: an instrument procedure chart with maximum ATC facilities available.
available.
10-16
SC-4, 16 DEC 2010 to 13 JAN 2011

The radar controller vectors the aircraft to align it with the
“slightly” or “well” and is expected to adjust the aircraft’s rate
runway centerline. The controller continues the vectors to
of descent/ascent to return to the glidepath. Trend information
keep the aircraft on course until the pilot can complete the
is also issued with respect to the elevation of the aircraft and
approach and landing by visual reference to the surface.
may be modified by the terms “rapidly” and “slowly” (e.g.,
There are two types of radar approaches: Precision (PAR)
“well above glidepath, coming down rapidly”).
and Surveillance (ASR).
Range from touchdown is given at least once each mile. If
an aircraft is observed by the controller to proceed outside of
A radar approach may be given to any aircraft upon request
specified safety zone limits in azimuth and/or elevation and
and may be offered to pilots of aircraft in distress or to expedite
continue to operate outside these prescribed limits, the pilot
traffic; however, an ASR might not be approved unless
is directed to execute a missed approach or to fly a specified
there is an ATC operational requirement or in an unusual
course unless the pilot has the runway environment (runway,
or emergency situation. Acceptance of a PAR or ASR by a
approach lights, etc.) in sight. Navigational guidance in
pilot does not waive the prescribed weather minimums for the
azimuth and elevation is provided to the pilot until the aircraft
airport or for the particular aircraft operator concerned. The
reaches the published DH. Advisory course and glidepath
decision to make a radar approach when the reported weather
information is furnished by the controller until the aircraft
is below the established minimums rests with the pilot.
passes over the landing threshold. At this point, the pilot is
advised of any deviation from the runway centerline. Radar
PAR and ASR minimums are published on separate pages
service is automatically terminated upon completion of the
in the FAA TPP. Figure 10-10.
approach.
PAR is one in which a controller provides highly accurate
ASR is one in which a controller provides navigational
navigational guidance in azimuth and elevation to a pilot.
guidance in azimuth only.
The controller gives the pilot headings to fly that direct the
The controller furnishes the pilot with headings to fly to
aircraft to, and keep the aircraft aligned with, the extended
align the aircraft with the extended centerline of the landing
centerline of the landing runway. The pilot is told to anticipate
runway. Since the radar information used for a surveillance
glidepath interception approximately 10 to 30 seconds before
approach is considerably less precise than that used for a
it occurs and when to start descent. The published decision
precision approach, the accuracy of the approach is not as
height (DH) is given only if the pilot requests it. If the aircraft
great and higher minimums apply. Guidance in elevation
is observed to deviate above or below the glidepath, the pilot
is not possible, but the pilot is advised when to commence
is given the relative amount of deviation by use of terms
N6
RADAR MINS
RADAR INSTRUMENT APPROACH MINIMUMS
TROY, AL
ELEV 397
Amdt. 7, DEC 22, 2005 (FAA)
TROY MUNI
RADAR¹ - 121.1 319.25
DA/
HAT/
DA/
HAT/
RWY GS/TCH/RPI
CAT
MDA-VIS
HAA CEIL-VIS
CAT
MDA-VIS
HAA CEIL-VIS
ABCD 642 -1
PAR
2.9/51/
(300-1)
920 -1
920 -1½
(600-1)
C
(600-1½)
ASR
AB
920 -1¾
(600-1¾)
D
940 -1
960 -1½
(600-1)
C
(600-1½)
CIRCLING
AB
980 -2
(600-2)
D
When control tower closed, procedure not authorized.
¹Opr by US Army 1430-2230Z++ Mon-Fri exc hol.
Vv
WRIGHT AAF (LHW), (FORT STEWART) GA (30 NOV 00 USA)
ELEV 48
RADAR 1 - (U) 118.775 267.15
DH/
HAT/
RWY
GS/TCH/RPI
CAT
MDA-VIS
HAA CEIL-VIS
Figure 10-10. Radar instrument approach minimums for Troy, Alabama.
ASR
33R
ABCD
380-¾
(400-¾)
6L
AB 620-1 573
(600-1)
10-17

descent to the Minimum Descent Altitude (MDA) or, if
appropriate, to an intermediate step-down fix Minimum
Crossing Altitude (MCA) and subsequently to the prescribed
MDA. In addition, the pilot is advised of the location of the
Missed Approach Point (MAP) prescribed for the procedure
and the aircraft’s position each mile on final from the runway,
airport, heliport, or MAP, as appropriate.
If requested by the pilot, recommended altitudes are issued
at each mile, based on the descent gradient established for
the procedure, down to the last mile that is at or above the
MDA. Normally, navigational guidance is provided until the
aircraft reaches the MAP.
Radar service is automatically terminated at the completion
of a radar approach.
No-Gyro Approach is available to a pilot under radar control
who experiences circumstances wherein the directional gyro
or other stabilized compass is inoperative or inaccurate. When
this occurs, the pilot should so advise ATC and request a no-
gyro vector or approach. The pilot of an aircraft not equipped
with a directional gyro or other stabilized compass who
desires radar handling may also request a no-gyro vector or
approach. The pilot should make all turns at standard rate
and should execute the turn immediately upon receipt of
instructions. For example, “TURN RIGHT,” “STOP TURN.”
When a surveillance or precision approach is made, the
pilot is advised after the aircraft has been turned onto final
approach to make turns at half standard rate.
Radar Monitoring of Instrument Approaches
PAR facilities operated by the FAA and the military services
at some joint-use (civil and military) and military installations
monitor aircraft on instrument approaches and issue radar
advisories to the pilot when weather is below VFR minimums
(1,000 and 3), at night, or when requested by a pilot. This
service is provided only when the PAR Final Approach
Course coincides with the final approach of the navigational
aid and only during the operational hours of the PAR. The
radar advisories serve only as a secondary aid since the pilot
has selected the NAVAID as the primary aid for the approach.
Prior to starting final approach, the pilot is advised of the
frequency on which the advisories are transmitted. If, for
any reason, radar advisories cannot be furnished, the pilot
is so advised.
Advisory information, derived from radar observations,
includes information on:
1.
Passing the final approach fix inbound (nonprecision
approach) or passing the outer marker or fix used in
lieu of the outer marker inbound (precision approach).
10-18
2.
Trend advisories with respect to elevation and/or
azimuth radar position and movement are provided.
3.
If, after repeated advisories, the aircraft proceeds
outside the PAR safety limit or if a radical deviation
is observed, the pilot is advised to execute a missed
approach unless the prescribed visual reference with
the surface is established.
Radar service is automatically terminated upon completion
of the approach. [Figure 10-11]
Timed Approaches From a Holding Fix
Timed approaches from a holding fix are conducted when
many aircraft are waiting for an approach clearance. Although
the controller does not specifically state “timed approaches
are in progress,” the assigning of a time to depart the FAF
inbound (nonprecision approach), or the outer marker or fix
used in lieu of the outer marker inbound (precision approach),
indicates that timed approach procedures are being utilized.
In lieu of holding, the controller may use radar vectors to the
final approach course to establish a distance between aircraft
that ensures the appropriate time sequence between the FAF
and outer marker or fix used in lieu of the outer marker and
the airport. Each pilot in the approach sequence is given
advance notice of the time they should leave the holding point
on approach to the airport. When a time to leave the holding
point is received, the pilot should adjust the flightpath in order
to leave the fix as closely as possible to the designated time.
Timed approaches may be conducted when the following
conditions are met:
1.
A control tower is in operation at the airport where
the approaches are conducted.
2.
Direct communications are maintained between the
pilot and the Center or approach controller until the
pilot is instructed to contact the tower.
3.
If more than one MAP is available, none require a
course reversal.
4.
If only one MAP is available, the following conditions
are met:
a) Course reversal is not required; and
b) Reported ceiling and visibility are equal to or
greater than the highest prescribed circling
minimums for the IAP.
5.
When cleared for the approach, pilots should not
execute a procedure turn.

SE-4, 16 DEC 2010 to 13 JAN 2011
Figure 10-11. ILS RWY 7 Troy, Alabama.
SE-4, 16 DEC 2010 to 13 JAN 2011
10-19

Approaches to Parallel Runways
Procedures permit ILS instrument approach operations to dual
or triple parallel runway configurations. A parallel approach
is an ATC procedure that permits parallel ILS approach to
airports with parallel runways separated by at least 2,500
feet between centerlines. Wherever parallel approaches
are in progress, pilots are informed that approaches to both
runways are in use.
Simultaneous approaches are permitted to runways:
1.
With centerlines separated by 4,300 to 9,000 feet;
2.
Equipped with final monitor controllers;
3.
Requiring radar monitoring to ensure separation
between aircraft on the adjacent parallel approach
course.
The approach procedure chart includes the note “simultaneous
approaches authorized RWYS 14L and 14R,” identifying
the appropriate runways. When advised that simultaneous
parallel approaches are in progress, pilots must advise
approach control immediately of malfunctioning or
inoperative components.
Parallel approach operations demand heightened pilot
situational awareness. The close proximity of adjacent
aircraft conducting simultaneous parallel approaches
mandates strict compliance with all ATC clearances and
approach procedures. Pilots should pay particular attention
to the following approach chart information: name and
number of the approach, localizer frequency, inbound course,
glideslope intercept altitude, DA/DH, missed approach
instructions, special notes/procedures, and the assigned
runway location and proximity to adjacent runways. Pilots
also need to exercise strict radio discipline, which includes
continuous monitoring of communications and the avoidance
of lengthy, unnecessary radio transmissions.
Side-Step Maneuver
ATC may authorize a side-step maneuver to either one of
two parallel runways that are separated by 1,200 feet or less,
followed by a straight-in landing on the adjacent runway.
Aircraft executing a side-step maneuver are cleared for a
specified nonprecision approach and landing on the adjacent
parallel runway. For example, “Cleared ILS runway 7 left
approach, side-step to runway 7 right.” The pilot is expected
to commence the side-step maneuver as soon as possible
after the runway or runway environment is in sight. Landing
minimums to the adjacent runway are based on nonprecision
criteria and therefore higher than the precision minimums
to the primary runway, but are normally lower than the
published circling minimums.
10-20
Circling Approaches
Landing minimums listed on the approach chart under
“CIRCLING” apply when it is necessary to circle the airport,
maneuver for landing, or when no straight-in minimums are
specified on the approach chart. [Figure 10-11]
The circling minimums published on the instrument approach
chart provide a minimum of 300 feet of obstacle clearance in
the circling area. [Figure 10-12] During a circling approach,
the pilot should maintain visual contact with the runway of
intended landing and fly no lower than the circling minimums
until positioned to make a final descent for a landing. It is
important to remember that circling minimums are only
minimums. If the ceiling allows it, fly at an altitude that more
nearly approximates VFR traffic pattern altitude. This makes
any maneuvering safer and brings the view of the landing
runway into a more normal perspective.
A
—™_
B
-—
i
C
—fj
D
-—i
E
=
i
Defining size of areas, radii (r) vary
with the approach category
Figure 10-12. Circling approach area radii.
Figure 10-13 shows patterns that can be used for circling
approaches. Pattern A can be flown when the final approach
course intersects the runway centerline at less than a 90°
angle, and the runway is in sight early enough to establish a
base leg. If the runway becomes visible too late to fly pattern
A, circle as shown in B. Fly pattern C if it is desirable to land
opposite the direction of the final approach, and the runway
is sighted in time for a turn to downwind leg. If the runway
is sighted too late for a turn to downwind, fly pattern “D.”
Regardless of the pattern flown, the pilot must maneuver the
aircraft to remain within the designated circling area. Refer to
section A (“Terms and Landing Minima Data”) in the front
of each TPP for a description of circling approach categories.
The criteria for determining the pattern to be flown are
based on personal flying capabilities and knowledge of the

>
A
B
C
D
If the runway is
If it is desirable
Circle runway if the runway
Pattern A can be flown when the
sighted too late
to land opposite
becomes visible too late to fly
final approach course
for a turn to
the direction of
pattern A.
intersects the runway
downwind,
the final app-
centerline at less than
fly pattern D.
roach, and the
a 90° angle, and the
runway is sighted
runway is in sight early
in time for a turn
enough to establish a
to downwind leg,
base leg.
@
fly pattern C.
ry
|
yy
ry
|
ay
Sf
.
Sf
|
yy
|
yy
Figure 10-13. Circling approaches.
performance characteristics of the aircraft. In each instance,
remaining clear of obstacles. The procedure is shown on the
the pilot must consider all factors: airport design, ceiling and
approach chart in text and graphic form. Since the execution
visibility, wind direction and velocity, final approach course
of a missed approach occurs when the flight deck workload is
alignment, distance from the final approach fix to the runway,
at a maximum, the procedure should be studied and mastered
and ATC instructions.
before beginning the approach.
IAP Minimums
When a MAP is initiated, a climb pitch attitude should be
established while setting climb power. Configure the aircraft
Pilots may not operate an aircraft at any airport below
for climb, turn to the appropriate heading, advise ATC that
the authorized MDA or continue an approach below the
a missed approach is being executed, and request further
authorized DA/DH unless:
clearances.
1.
The aircraft is continuously in a position from which
a descent to a landing on the intended runway can be
If the missed approach is initiated prior to reaching the MAP,
made at a normal descent rate using normal maneuvers;
unless otherwise cleared by ATC, continue to fly the IAP as
2.
The flight visibility is not less than that prescribed for
specified on the approach chart. Fly to the MAP at or above
the approach procedure being used; and
the MDA or DA/DH before beginning a turn.
3.
At least one of the following visual references for the
If visual reference is lost while circling-to-land from an
intended runway is visible and identifiable to the pilot:
instrument approach, execute the appropriate MAP. Make
a) Approach light system
the initial climbing turn toward the landing runway and then
b) Threshold
maneuver to intercept and fly the missed approach course.
c) Threshold markings
Pilots should immediately execute the MAP:
d) Threshold lights
1.
Whenever the requirements for operating below DA/
e) Runway end identifier lights (REIL)
DH or MDA are not met when the aircraft is below
f)
Visual approach slope indicator (VASI)
MDA, or upon arrival at the MAP and at any time
after that until touchdown;
g) Touchdown zone or touchdown zone markings
2.
Whenever an identifiable part of the airport is not
h) Touchdown zone lights
visible to the pilot during a circling maneuver at or
i)
Runway or runway markings
above MDA; or
j)
Runway lights
3.
When so directed by ATC.
Missed Approaches
A MAP is formulated for each published instrument approach
and allows the pilot to return to the airway structure while
10-21

Landing
According to 14 CFR part 91, no pilot may land when the
flight visibility is less than the visibility prescribed in the
standard IAP being used. ATC provides the pilot with the
current visibility reports appropriate to the runway in use.
This may be in the form of prevailing visibility, runway visual
value (RVV), or runway visual range (RVR). However, only
the pilot can determine if the flight visibility meets the landing
requirements indicated on the approach chart. If the flight
visibility meets the minimum prescribed for the approach,
then the approach may be continued to a landing. If the flight
visibility is less than that prescribed for the approach, then
the pilot must execute a missed approach regardless of the
reported visibility.
The landing minimums published on IAP charts are based on
full operation of all components and visual aids associated
with the instrument approach chart being used. Higher
minimums are required with inoperative components or
visual aids. For example, if the ALSF-1 approach lighting
system were inoperative, the visibility minimums for an ILS
would need to be increased by one-quarter mile. If more
than one component is inoperative, each minimum is raised
to the highest minimum required by any single component
that is inoperative. ILS glideslope inoperative minimums
are published on instrument approach charts as localizer
minimums. Consult the “Inoperative Components or Visual
Aids Table” (printed on the inside front cover of each
TPP) for a complete description of the effect of inoperative
components on approach minimums.
Instrument Weather Flying
Flying Experience
The more experience a pilot has in VFR and IFR flight,
the more proficient a pilot becomes. VFR experience can
be gained by flying in terminal areas with high traffic
activity. This type of flying forces the pilot to polish the
skill of dividing his or her attention between aircraft control,
navigation, communications, and other flight deck duties.
IFR experience can be gained through night flying which
also promotes both instrument proficiency and confidence.
The progression from flying at night under clear, moonlit
conditions to flying at night without moonlight, natural
horizon, or familiar landmarks teaches a pilot to trust the
aircraft instruments with minimal dependence upon what
can be seen outside the aircraft. It is a pilot’s decision to
proceed with an IFR flight or to wait for more acceptable
weather conditions.
Recency of Experience
Currency as an instrument pilot is an equally important
consideration. No person may act as pilot in command of an
10-22
aircraft under IFR or in weather conditions less than VFR
minimums unless he or she has met the requirements of Part
91. Remember, these are minimum requirements.
Airborne Equipment and Ground Facilities
Regulations specify minimum equipment for filing an IFR
flight plan. It is the pilot’s responsibility to determine the
adequacy of the aircraft and navigation/communication
(NAV/COM) equipment for the proposed IFR flight.
Performance limitations, accessories, and general condition
of the equipment are directly related to the weather, route,
altitude, and ground facilities pertinent to the flight, as well
as to the flight deck workload.
Weather Conditions
In addition to the weather conditions that might affect a
VFR flight, an IFR pilot must consider the effects of other
weather phenomena (e.g., thunderstorms, turbulence, icing,
and visibility).
Turbulence
Inflight turbulence can range from occasional light bumps to
extreme airspeed and altitude variations that make aircraft
control difficult. To reduce the risk factors associated with
turbulence, pilots must learn methods of avoidance, as well as
piloting techniques for dealing with an inadvertent encounter.
Turbulence avoidance begins with a thorough preflight
weather briefing. Many reports and forecasts are available to
assist the pilot in determining areas of potential turbulence.
These include the Severe Weather Warning (WW), SIGMET
(WS), Convective SIGMET (WST), AIRMET (WA), Severe
Weather Outlook (AC), Center Weather Advisory (CWA),
Area Forecast (FA), and Pilot Reports (UA or PIREPs). Since
thunderstorms are always indicative of turbulence, areas
of known and forecast thunderstorm activity is always of
interest to the pilot. In addition, clear air turbulence (CAT)
associated with jet streams, strong winds over rough terrain,
and fast moving cold fronts are good indicators of turbulence.
Pilots should be alert while in flight for the signposts of
turbulence. For example, clouds with vertical development
such as cumulus, towering cumulus, and cumulonimbus are
indicators of atmospheric instability and possible turbulence.
Standing lenticular clouds lack vertical development but
indicate strong mountain wave turbulence. While en route,
pilots can monitor hazardous inflight weather advisory
service (HIWAS) broadcast for updated weather advisories,
or contact the nearest FSS or En Route Flight Advisory
Service (EFAS) for the latest turbulence-related PIREPs.

To avoid turbulence associated with strong thunderstorms,
found in the AIM, which also describes the procedure for
circumnavigate cells by at least 20 miles. Turbulence may
volunteering PIREPs relating to turbulence.
also be present in the clear air above a thunderstorm. To
Structural Icing
avoid this, fly at least 1,000 feet above the top for every 10
knots of wind at that level, or fly around the storm. Finally,
The very nature of flight in instrument meteorological
do not underestimate the turbulence beneath a thunderstorm.
conditions (IMC) means operating in visible moisture such
Never attempt to fly under a thunderstorm. The possible
as clouds. At the right temperatures, this moisture can
results of turbulence and wind shear under the storm could
freeze on the aircraft, causing increased weight, degraded
be disastrous.
performance, and unpredictable aerodynamic characteristics.
Understanding avoidance and early recognition followed
When moderate to severe turbulence is encountered, aircraft
by prompt action are the keys to avoiding this potentially
control is difficult, and a great deal of concentration is
hazardous situation.
required to maintain an instrument scan. [Figure 10-14]
Pilots should immediately reduce power and slow the
Structural icing refers to the accumulation of ice on the
aircraft to the recommended turbulence penetration speed
exterior of the aircraft and is broken down into three
as described in the POH/AFM. To minimize the load factor
classifications: rime ice, clear ice, and mixed ice. For ice
imposed on the aircraft, the wings should be kept level and the
to form, there must be moisture present in the air, and the
aircraft’s pitch attitude should be held constant. The aircraft
air must be cooled to a temperature of 0 °C (32 °F) or less.
is allowed to fluctuate up and down because maneuvering
Aerodynamic cooling can lower the surface temperature of
to maintain a constant altitude only increases the stress on
an airfoil and cause ice to form on the airframe even though
the aircraft. If necessary, the pilot should advise ATC of
the ambient temperature is slightly above freezing.
the fluctuations and request a block altitude clearance. In
addition, the power should remain constant at a setting that
Rime ice forms if the droplets are small and freeze
maintains the recommended turbulence penetration airspeed.
immediately when contacting the aircraft surface. This type
of ice usually forms on areas such as the leading edges of
The best source of information on the location and intensity
wings or struts. It has a somewhat rough-looking appearance
of turbulence are PIREPs. Therefore, pilots are encouraged to
and a milky-white color.
familiarize themselves with the turbulence reporting criteria
=
=
=_—_
=
=
=<) (oy
a
—=~
Sa.
a —
— Se
i
——-
i sf
_. *
Figure 10-14. Maintaining an instrument scan in severe turbulence can be difficult.
10-23

Clear ice is usually formed from larger water droplets or
freezing rain that can spread over a surface. This is the most
dangerous type of ice since it is clear, hard to see, and can
change the shape of the airfoil.
Mixed ice is a mixture of clear ice and rime ice. It has the
bad characteristics of both types and can form rapidly. Ice
particles become embedded in clear ice, building a very
rough accumulation. The table in Figure 10-15 lists the
temperatures at which the various types of ice form.
0 °C to –10 °C
–10 °C to –15 °C
–15 °C to –20°C
Figure 10-14. Temperature ranges for ice formation.
Figure 10-15. Temperature ranges for ice formation.
Structural icing is a condition that can only get worse.
Therefore, during an inadvertent icing encounter, it is
important the pilot act to prevent additional ice accumulation.
Regardless of the level of anti-ice or deice protection offered
by the aircraft, the first course of action should be to leave
the area of visible moisture. This might mean descending
to an altitude below the cloud bases, climbing to an altitude
that is above the cloud tops, or turning to a different course.
If this is not possible, then the pilot must move to an altitude
where the temperature is above freezing. Pilots should report
icing conditions to ATC and request new routing or altitude
if icing will be a hazard. Refer to the AIM for information
on reporting icing intensities.
Fog
Instrument pilots must learn to anticipate conditions leading
to the formation of fog and take appropriate action early in
the progress of the flight. Before a flight, close examination
of current and forecast weather should alert the pilot to the
possibility of fog formation. When fog is a consideration,
pilots should plan adequate fuel reserves and alternate landing
sites. En route, the pilot must stay alert for fog formation
through weather updates from EFAS, ATIS, and ASOS/
AWOS sites.
Two conditions lead to the formation of fog. Either the air
is cooled to saturation, or sufficient moisture is added to the
air until saturation occurs. In either case, fog can form when
the temperature/dewpoint spread is 5° or less. Pilots planning
to arrive at their destination near dusk with decreasing
temperatures should be particularly concerned about the
possibility of fog formation.
10-24
Volcanic Ash
Volcanic eruptions create volcanic ash clouds containing
an abrasive dust that poses a serious safety threat to flight
operations. Adding to the danger is the fact that these ash
clouds are not easily discernible from ordinary clouds when
encountered at some distance from the volcanic eruption.
When an aircraft enters a volcanic ash cloud, dust particles
and smoke may become evident in the cabin, often along with
the odor of an electrical fire. Inside the volcanic ash cloud,
the aircraft may also experience lightning and St. Elmo’s fire
on the windscreen. The abrasive nature of the volcanic ash
can pit the windscreens, thus reducing or eliminating forward
Clear
visibility. The pitot-static system may become clogged,
Mixed clear and rime
causing instrument failure. Severe engine damage is probable
in both piston and jet-powered aircraft.
Rime
Every effort must be made to avoid volcanic ash. Since
volcanic ash clouds are carried by the wind, pilots should plan
their flights to remain upwind of the ash-producing volcano.
Visual detection and airborne radar are not considered
a reliable means of avoiding volcanic ash clouds. Pilots
witnessing volcanic eruptions or encountering volcanic ash
should immediately pass this information along in the form of
a pilot report. The National Weather Service (NWS) monitors
volcanic eruptions and estimates ash trajectories. This
information is passed along to pilots in the form of SIGMETs.
As for many other hazards to flight, the best source of
volcanic information comes from PIREPs. Pilots who
witness a volcanic eruption or encounter volcanic ash in flight
should immediately inform the nearest agency. Volcanic
Ash Forecast Transport and Dispersion (VAFTAD) charts
are also available; these depict volcanic ash cloud locations
in the atmosphere following an eruption and also forecast
dispersion of the ash concentrations over 6- and 12-hour
time intervals. See AC 00-45, Aviation Weather Services.
Thunderstorms
A thunderstorm packs just about every weather hazard known
to aviation into one vicious bundle. Turbulence, hail, rain,
snow, lightning, sustained updrafts and downdrafts, and
icing conditions are all present in thunderstorms. Do not
take off in the face of an approaching thunderstorm or fly an
aircraft that is not equipped with thunderstorm detection in
clouds or at night in areas of suspected thunderstorm activity.
[Figure 10-16]
There is no useful correlation between the external visual
appearance of thunderstorms and the severity or amount of
turbulence or hail within them. All thunderstorms should be
considered hazardous, and thunderstorms with tops above
35,000 feet should be considered extremely hazardous.

between –5 ° C and +5 ° C. In addition, an aircraft flying in the
clear air near a thunderstorm is also susceptible to lightning
strikes. Thunderstorm avoidance is always the best policy.
Wind Shear
s
Wind shear can be defined as a change in wind speed and/or
wind direction in a short distance. It can exist in a horizontal
or vertical direction and occasionally in both. Wind shear can
occur at all levels of the atmosphere but is of greatest concern
during takeoffs and landings. It is typically associated
with thunderstorms and low-level temperature inversions;
however, the jet stream and weather fronts are also sources
of wind shear.
As Figure 10-17 illustrates, while an aircraft is on an
instrument approach, a shear from a tailwind to a headwind
causes the airspeed to increase and the nose to pitch up with
a corresponding balloon above the glidepath. A shear from
a headwind to a tailwind has the opposite effect, and the
aircraft will sink below the glidepath.
A headwind shear followed by a tailwind/downdraft shear is
particularly dangerous because the pilot has reduced power
and lowered the nose in response to the headwind shear. This
leaves the aircraft in a nose-low, power-low configuration
Figure 10-16. A thunderstorm packs just about every weather hazard
when the tailwind shear occurs, which makes recovery more
known to aviation into one vicious bundle.
difficult, particularly near the ground. This type of wind
Weather radar, airborne or ground based, normally reflects
shear scenario is likely while making an approach in the
the areas of moderate to heavy precipitation (radar does not
face of an oncoming thunderstorm. Pilots should be alert for
detect turbulence). The frequency and severity of turbulence
indications of wind shear early in the approach phase and be
generally increases with the radar reflectivity closely
ready to initiate a missed approach at the first indication. It
associated with the areas of highest liquid water content of
may be impossible to recover from a wind shear encounter
the storm. A flightpath through an area of strong or very
at low altitude.
strong radar echoes separated by 20 to 30 miles or less may
not be considered free of severe turbulence.
To inform pilots of hazardous wind shear activity, some
airports have installed a Low-Level Wind Shear Alert
The probability of lightning strikes occurring to aircraft is
System (LLWAS) consisting of a centerfield wind indicator
greatest when operating at altitudes where temperatures are
and several surrounding boundary-wind indicators. With
a
Tailwind Shearing to Headwind or Calm
Headwind Shearing to Tailwind or Calm
—
Front
Front
:
:
—_—
—
—_—
—
§
|
—_—
—_=
—
a
—_—
OM(outer marker)
OM(outer marker)
Figure 10-17. Glideslope deviations due to wind shear encounter.
10-25

this system, controllers are alerted of wind discrepancies
(an indicator of wind shear possibility) and provide this
information to pilots. A typical wind shear alert issued to a
pilot would be:
“Runway 27 arrival, wind shear alert, 20 knot loss 3
mile final, threshold wind 200 at 15”
In plain language, the controller is advising aircraft arriving
on runway 27 that at about 3 miles out they can expect a
wind shear condition that will decrease their airspeed by 20
knots and possibly encounter turbulence. Additionally, the
airport surface winds for landing runway 27 are reported as
200° at 15 knots.
Pilots encountering wind shear are encouraged to pass along
pilot reports. Refer to AIM for additional information on
wind shear PIREPs.
VFR-On-Top
Pilots on IFR flight plans operating in VFR weather
conditions may request VFR-on-top in lieu of an assigned
altitude. This permits them to select an altitude or flight level
of their choice (subject to any ATC restrictions).
Pilots desiring to climb through a cloud, haze, smoke, or
other meteorological formation and then either cancel their
IFR flight plan or operate VFR-on-top may request a climb
to VFR-on-top. The ATC authorization contains a top report
(or a statement that no top report is available) and a request
to report upon reaching VFR-on-top. Additionally, the ATC
authorization may contain a clearance limit, routing, and
an alternative clearance if VFR-on-top is not reached by a
specified altitude.
A pilot on an IFR flight plan, operating in VFR conditions,
may request to climb/descend in VFR conditions. When
operating in VFR conditions with an ATC authorization to
“maintain VFR-on-top/maintain VFR conditions,” pilots on
IFR flight plans must:
1.
Fly at the appropriate VFR altitude as prescribed in
14 CFR part 91.
2.
Comply with the VFR visibility and distance-from-
cloud criteria in 14 CFR part 91.
3.
Comply with IFR applicable to this flight (minimum IFR
altitudes, position reporting, radio communications,
course to be flown, adherence to ATC clearance, etc.).
Pilots operating on a VFR-on-top clearance should advise
ATC before any altitude change to ensure the exchange of
accurate traffic information.
10-26
ATC authorization to “maintain VFR-on-top” is not intended
to restrict pilots to operating only above an obscuring
meteorological formation (layer). Rather, it permits operation
above, below, between layers, or in areas where there is no
meteorological obstruction. It is imperative pilots understand,
however, that clearance to operate “VFR-on-top/VFR
conditions” does not imply cancellation of the IFR flight plan.
Pilots operating VFR-on-top/VFR conditions may receive
traffic information from ATC on other pertinent IFR or
VFR aircraft. However, when operating in VFR weather
conditions, it is the pilot’s responsibility to be vigilant to see
and avoid other aircraft.
This clearance must be requested by the pilot on an IFR flight
plan. VFR-on-top is not permitted in certain areas, such as
Class A airspace. Consequently, IFR flights operating VFR-
on-top must avoid such airspace.
VFR Over-The-Top
VFR over-the-top must not be confused with VFR-on-
top. VFR-on-top is an IFR clearance that allows the pilot
to fly VFR altitudes. VFR over-the-top is strictly a VFR
operation in which the pilot maintains VFR cloud clearance
requirements while operating on top of an undercast layer.
This situation might occur when the departure airport and the
destination airport are reporting clear conditions, but a low
overcast layer is present in between. The pilot could conduct
a VFR departure, fly over the top of the undercast in VFR
conditions, then complete a VFR descent and landing at the
destination. VFR cloud clearance requirements would be
maintained at all times, and an IFR clearance would not be
required for any part of the flight.
Conducting an IFR Flight
To illustrate some of the concepts introduced in this chapter,
follow along on a typical IFR flight from the Birmingham
International Airport (BHM), Birmingham, Alabama to
Gulfport-Biloxi International Airport (GPT), Gulfport,
Mississippi. [Figure 10-18] For this trip, a Cessna 182 with
a call sign of N1230A is flown. The aircraft is equipped with
dual navigation and communication radios, a transponder,
and a GPS system approved for IFR en route, terminal, and
approach operations.
Preflight
The success of the flight depends largely upon the
thoroughness of the preflight planning. The evening before
the flight, pay close attention to the weather forecast and
begin planning the flight.

_
pate
N 32 ° 2 2 . 01' W 8 8 ° 2 7 . 5 0'
GREENWOOD
KEWANEE
113.8 EWA 8 5
122.1R
&
y
dj
~~
i
~~
A
SC-4, 16 DEC 2010 to 13 JAN 2011
SC-4, 16 DEC 2010 to 13 JAN 2011
Figure 10-17. Route Planning.
Figure 10-17. Route planning, Gulfport-Biloxi.
Figure 10-18. Route planning.
10-27

The Weather Channel indicates a large, low-pressure system
has settled in over the Midwest, pulling moisture up from
the Gulf of Mexico and causing low ceilings and visibility
with little chance for improvement over the next couple of
days. To begin planning, gather all the necessary charts and
materials, and verify everything is current. This includes en
route charts, approach charts, DPs, STAR charts, the GPS
database, as well as an A/FD, some navigation logs, and the
aircraft’s POH/AFM. The charts cover both the departure
and arrival airports and any contingency airports that will
be needed if the flight cannot be completed as planned. This
is also a good time for the pilot to consider recent flight
experience, pilot proficiency, fitness, and personal weather
minimums to fly this particular flight.
Check the A/FD to become familiar with the departure and
arrival airport, and check for any preferred routing between
BHM and GPT. Next, review the approach charts and any
DP or STAR that pertains to the flight. Finally, review the
en route charts for potential routing, paying close attention
to the minimum en route and obstacle clearance altitudes.
After this review, select the best option. For this flight, the
Birmingham Three Departure [Figure 10-2] to Brookwood
VORTAC, V 209 to Kewanee VORTAC, direct to Gulfport
using GPS would be a logical route. An altitude of 4,000 feet
meets all the regulatory requirements and falls well within
the performance capabilities of the aircraft.
Next, call 1-800-WX-BRIEF to obtain an outlook-type
weather briefing for the proposed flight. This provides
forecast conditions for departure and arrival airports, as well
as the en route portion of the flight including forecast winds
aloft. This also is a good opportunity to check the available
NOTAMs.
The weather briefer confirms the predictions of the Weather
Channel giving forecast conditions that are at or near
minimum landing minimums at both BHM and GPT for
the proposed departure time. The briefer provides NOTAM
information for GPT indicating that the localizer to runway
32 is scheduled to be out of service and that runway 18/36 is
closed until further notice. Also check for temporary flight
restrictions (TFRs) along the proposed route.
After receiving a weather briefing, continue flight planning
and begin to transfer some preliminary information onto
the navigation log, listing each fix along the route and the
distances, frequencies, and altitudes. Consolidating this
information onto an organized navigation log keeps the
workload to a minimum during the flight.
10-28
Next, obtain a standard weather briefing online for the
proposed route. A check of current conditions indicates
low IFR conditions at both the departure airport and the
destination, with visibility of one-quarter mile:
SURFACE WEATHER OBSERVATIONS
METAR KBHM 111155Z VRB04KT ¼ SM FG –RA VV004
06/05 A2994 RMK A02 SLP140
METAR KGPT 111156Z 24003KT ¼ SM FG OVC001 08/07
A2962 RMK A02 SLP033
The small temperature/dewpoint spread is causing the low
visibility and ceilings. Conditions should improve later in
the day as temperatures increase. A check of the terminal
forecast confirms this theory:
TERMINAL FORECASTS
TAF KBHM 111156Z 111212 VRB04KT ¼ SM FG VV004
TEMPO1316 ¾ SM OVC004
FM1600 VRB05KT 2SM BR OVC007 TEMPO 1720 3SM
DZ BKN009
FM2000 22008KT 3SM –RA OVC015 TEMP 2205 3SM
–RA OVC025 FM0500 23013KT P6SM OVC025
FM0800 23013KT P6SM BKN030 PROB40 1012 2SM BR
OVC030
TAF KGPT 111153Z 111212 24004KT ¼ SM FG OVC001
BECMG 1317 3SM BR 0VC004
FM1700 24010KT 4SM –RA OVC006 FM0400 24010 5SM
SCT080 TEMPO 0612 P6SM SKC
In addition to the terminal forecast, the area forecast also
indicates gradual improvement along the route. Since the
terminal forecast only provides information for a 5-mile
radius around a terminal area, checking the area forecast
provides a better understanding of the overall weather picture
along the route, as well as potential hazards:
SYNOPSIS AND VFR CLOUDS/WEATHER FORECASTS
SYNOPSIS… AREA OF LOW PRESSURE CNTD OV AL
RMNG GENLY STNRY BRNGNG MSTR AND WD SPRD
IFR TO E TN. ALF…LOW PRES TROF ACRS CNTR PTN
OF THE DFW FA WILL GDLY MOV EWD DURG PD.
NRN LA, AR, NRN MS
SWLY WND THRUT THE PD. 16Z CIG OVC006. SCT
–SHRA. OTLK… IFR SRN ½ … CIG SCT – BKN015
TOPS TO FL250 SWLY WND THRUT THE PD. 17Z AGL
BKN040. OTLK…MVFR CIG VIS.

LA MS CSTL WTRS
CIG OVC001 – OVC006. TOPS TO FL240. VIS ¼ – ¾ SM
FG. SWLY WND. 16Z CIG OVC010 VIS 2 SM BR. OCNL
VIS 3-5SM –RN BR OVC009. OTLK…MVFR CIG VIS.
FL
CIG BKN020 TOPS TO FL180. VIS 1–3 SM BR. SWLY
WND. 18Z BRK030. OTLK…MVFR CIG.
At this time, there are no SIGMETs or PIREPs reported.
However, there are several AIRMETs, one for IFR
conditions, one for turbulence that covers the entire route,
and another for icing conditions that covers an area just north
of the route:
WAUS44 KKCI 111150
DFWS WA 0111150
AIRMET SIERRA FOR IFR VALID UNTIL 111800
AIRMET IFR...OK TX LA AR MS AL FL
TS IMPLY SEV OR GTR TURB SEV ICE LLWS AND
IFR CONDS.
NON MSL HGHTS DENOTED BY AGL OR CIG.
A recheck of NOTAMs for Gulfport confirms that the
localizer to runway 32 is out of service until further notice
and runway 18/36 is closed. If runway 6 is planned for the
departure, confirm that the climb restriction for the departure
can be met.
GPT 12/006 GPT LOC OS UFN
GPT 12/008 GPT MIRL RWY 18/36 OS UFN
Since the weather is substantially better to the east, Pensacola
Regional Airport is a good alternate with current conditions
and a forecast of marginal VFR.
METAR KPNS 111150Z 21010Z 3SM BKN014 OVC025
09/03 A2973
TAF KPNS 111152Z 111212 22010KT 3 SM BR OVC020
BECMG 1317 4 SM BR OVC025
FM1700 23010KT 4SM –RA OVC030
FM 0400 25014KT 5SM OVC050 TEMPO1612 P6SM
OVC080
If weather minimums are below a pilot’s personal minimums,
a delay in departure to wait for improved conditions is
a good decision. This time can be used to complete the
navigation log, which is the next step in planning an IFR
flight. [Figure 10-19]
Use the POH/AFM to compute a true airspeed, cruise power
setting, and fuel burn based on the forecast temperatures
aloft and cruising pressure altitude. Also, compute weight-
and-balance information and determine takeoff and landing
distances. There will be a crosswind if weather conditions
require a straight-in landing on runway 14 at GPT. Therefore,
compute the landing distance assuming a 10-knot crosswind
and determine if the runway length is adequate to allow
landing. Determine the estimated flight time and fuel burn
using the winds aloft forecast and considering Pensacola
Regional Airport as an alternate airport. With full tanks, the
flight can be made nonstop with adequate fuel for flight to
the destination, alternate, and the reserve requirement.
Next, check the surface analysis chart, which shows where
the pressure systems are found. The weather depiction chart
shows areas of IFR conditions and can be used to find areas
of improving conditions. These charts provide information a
pilot needs should a diversion to VFR conditions be required.
For this flight, the radar depicts precipitation along the route,
and the latest satellite photo confirms what the weather
depiction chart showed.
When the navigation log is finished, complete the flight plan
in preparation for filing with flight service. [Figure 10-20]
Call an FSS for an updated weather briefing. Birmingham
INTL airport is now reporting 700 overcast with 3 miles
visibility, and Gulfport-Biloxi is now 400 overcast with 2
miles visibility. The alternate, Pensacola Regional Airport,
continues to report adequate weather conditions with 2,000
overcast and 3 miles visibility in light rain.
Several pilot reports have been submitted for light icing
conditions; however, all the reports are north of the route
of flight and correspond to the AIRMET that was issued
earlier. No pilot reports have included cloud tops, but the
area forecast predicted cloud tops to flight level 240. Since
the weather conditions appear to be improving, a flight plan
can be filed using the completed form.
Analyze the latest weather minimums to determine if they
exceed personal minimums. With the absence of icing
reported along the route and steadily rising temperatures,
10-29

the clipboard indicates the VOR system has been checked —
FLIGHT LOG
TIME
DISTANCE
FUEL
TAKE OFF
LANDING
TOTAL
REQUIRED
AVAILABLE
1600 E
51 Gal
87 Gal
IDENT
LEG
ETE
ETE
ALTITUDE
MAG
ROUTE
REMARKS
(Check Point)
CRSE
FREQ
REMAINING
ATE
ATE
GND SPD
OKW
+16
16:16
Brookwood
3 Gal
111.0
EWA
+40
16:56
Kewanee
8 Gal
113.8
+54
17:50
Mindo
12 Gal
+08
17:58
Appr
2 Gal
1+58
Rascagoula
PNS
+35
18 Gal
Regional
—
ATIS
DEPERTURE
ARRIVAL
INFORMATION
INFORMATION
CEILING
CEILING
VISIBILITY
VISIBILITY
TEMP / DEWPOINT
TEMP / DEWPOINT
WINDS
WINDS
ALTIMETER
ALTIMETER
RWY IN USE
RWY IN USE
REMARKS
REMARKS
Figure 10-18. Flight plan from.
Figure 10-19. Navigation log.
structural icing should not be a problem. Make a note to do an
Once at the airport, conduct a thorough preflight inspection.
operational check of the pitot heat during preflight and to take
A quick check of the logbooks indicates all airworthiness
evasive action immediately should even light icing conditions
requirements have been met to conduct this IFR flight
be encountered in flight. This may require returning to BHM
including an altimeter, static, and transponder test within
or landing at an intermediate spot before reaching GPT. The
the preceding 24 calendar months. In addition, a log on
go/no-go decision is constantly reevaluated during the flight.
10-30

northwest.”—
N/230A C182/G
BHM
X
OKW V 209 EWA MINDO
Gulfport,
Biloxi
James Jones, 841 Oak St. Gardendail, Al. 205-555-6028
PNS
blue/white
Figure 10-20. Flight plan form.
Figure 10-19. Flight plan form.
within the preceding 30 days. Turn on the master switch and
Read back the clearance and review the DP. Although a
pitot heat, and quickly check the heating element before it
departure frequency was not given in the clearance, note that
becomes too hot. Then, complete the rest of the walk-around
on the DP, the departure control frequency is listed as 123.8
procedure. Since this is a flight in actual IFR conditions, place
for the southern sector. Since a departure from runway 24
special emphasis on IFR equipment during the walk-around,
is anticipated, note the instruction to climb to 2,100 prior
including the alternator belt and antennas. After completing
to turning. After tuning in the appropriate frequencies and
the preflight, organize charts, pencils, paper, and navigation
setting up navigation equipment for the departure routing,
log in the flight deck for quick, easy access. This is also the
contact ground control (noting that this is IFR) and receive
time to enter the planned flight into the GPS.
the following clearance:
“Cessna 1230A taxi to runway 24 via taxiway Mike.”
Departure
After starting the engine, tune in ATIS and copy the
Read back the clearance and aircraft call sign. After a review
information to the navigation log. The conditions remain the
of the taxi instructions on the airport diagram, begin to taxi
same as the updated weather briefing with the ceiling at 700
and check the flight instruments for proper indications.
overcast and visibility at 3 miles. Call clearance delivery to
receive a clearance:
Hold short of runway 24 and complete the before takeoff
checklist and engine run-up. Advise the tower when ready
“Clearance Delivery, Cessna 1230A IFR to Gulfport
for takeoff. The tower gives the following clearance:
Biloxi with information Kilo, ready to copy.”
“Cessna 30A cleared for takeoff runway 24.
Caution wake turbulence from 737 departing to the
“Cessna 1230A is cleared to Gulfport-Biloxi via the
Birmingham Three Departure, Brookwood, Victor
209 Kewanee then direct Mindo, Gulfport. Climb and
maintain 4,000. Squawk 0321.”
10-31

Taxi into position. Note the time off on the navigation log,
verify that the heading indicator and magnetic compass are
in agreement, the transponder is in the ALT position, all the
necessary lights, equipment, and pitot heat are on. Start the
takeoff roll. To avoid the 737’s wake turbulence, make note
of its lift off point and take off prior to that point.
En Route
After departure, climb straight ahead to 2,100 feet as directed
by the Birmingham Three Departure. While continuing a
climb to the assigned altitude of 4,000 feet, the following
instructions are received from the tower:
“Cessna 30A contact Departure.”
Acknowledge the clearance and contact departure on the
frequency designated by the DP. State the present altitude
so the departure controller can check the encoded altitude
against indicated altitude:
“Birmingham Departure Cessna 1230A climbing
through 2,700 heading 240.”
Departure replies:
“Cessna 30A proceed direct to Brookwood and resume
own navigation. Contact Atlanta Center on 134.05.”
Acknowledge the clearance, contact Atlanta Center and
proceed direct to Brookwood VORTAC, using the IFR-
approved GPS equipment. En route to Kewanee, VORTAC
Atlanta Center issues the following instructions:
“Cessna 1230A contact Memphis Center on
125.975.”
Acknowledge the instructions and contact Memphis Center
with aircraft ID and present altitude. Memphis Center
acknowledges contact:
“Cessna 1230A, Meridian altimeter is 29.87. Traffic
at your 2 o’clock and 6 miles is a King Air at 5,000
climbing to 12,000.”
Even when on an IFR flight plan, pilots are still responsible
for seeing and avoiding other aircraft. Acknowledge the call
from Memphis Center and inform them of negative contact
with traffic due to IMC.
“Roger, altimeter setting 29.87. Cessna 1230A is in
IMC negative contact with traffic.”
Continue the flight, and at each fix note the arrival time on
the navigation log to monitor progress.
To get an update of the weather at the destination and issue
a pilot report, contact the FSS servicing the area. To find the
10-32
nearest FSS, locate a nearby VOR and check above the VOR
information box for a frequency. In this case, the nearest VOR
is Kewanee VORTAC which lists a receive-only frequency
of 122.1 for Greenwood FSS. Request a frequency change
from Memphis and then attempt to contact Greenwood on
122.1 while listening over the Kewanee VORTAC frequency
of 113.8:
“Greenwood Radio Cessna 1230A receiving on
frequency 113.8, over.”
“Cessna 30A, this is Greenwood, go ahead.”
“Greenwood Radio, Cessna 30A is currently 30 miles
south of the Kewanee VORTAC at 4,000 feet en
route to Gulfport. Requesting an update of en route
conditions and current weather at GPT, as well as
PNS.”
“Cessna 30A, Greenwood Radio, current weather at
Gulfport is 400 overcast with 3 miles visibility in light
rain. The winds are from 140 at 7 and the altimeter
is 29.86. Weather across your route is generally IFR
in light rain with ceilings ranging from 300 to 1,000
overcast with visibilities between 1 and 3 miles.
Pensacola weather is much better with ceilings now
at 2,500 and visibility 6 miles. Checking current
NOTAMs at GPT shows the localizer out of service
and runway 18/36 closed.”
“Roger, Cessna 30A copies the weather. I have a
PIREP when you are ready to copy.”
“Cessna 30A go ahead with your PIREP.”
“Cessna 30A is a Cessna 182 located on the Kewanee
195° radial at 30 miles level at 4,000 feet. I am
currently in IMC conditions with a smooth ride.
Outside air temperature is plus 1° Celsius. Negative
icing.”
“Cessna 30A thank you for the PIREP.”
With the weather check and PIREP complete, return to
Memphis Center:
“Memphis Center, Cessna 1230A is back on your
frequency.”
“Cessna 1230A, Memphis Center, roger, contact
Houston Center now on frequency 126.8.”

“Roger, contact Houston Center frequency 126.8,
Cessna 1230A.”
“Houston Center, Cessna 1230A level at 4,000
feet.”
“Cessna 30A, Houston Center area altimeter 29.88.”
Arrival
40 miles north of Gulfport, tune in ATIS on number two
communication radio. The report reveals there has been no
change in the weather and ATIS is advertising ILS runway
14 as the active approach.
Houston Center completes a hand off to Gulfport approach
control with instructions to contact approach:
“Gulfport Approach, Cessna 1230A level 4,000 feet
with information TANGO. Request GPS Runway 14
approach.”
“Cessna 30A, Gulfport Approach, descend and
maintain 3,000 feet.”
“Descend to 3,000, Cessna 30A.”
Begin a descent to 3,000 and configure your navigation radios
for the approach. The GPS automatically changes from the
en route mode to the terminal mode. This change affects the
sensitivity of the CDI. Tune in the VORTAC frequency of
109.0 on the number one navigation radio and set in the final
approach course of 133° on the OBS. This setup helps with
situational awareness should the GPS lose signal.
“Cessna 30A your position is 7 miles from MINDO,
maintain 3,000 feet until MINDO, cleared for the GPS
runway 14 approach.”
Read back the clearance and concentrate on flying the aircraft.
At MINDO descend to 2,000 as depicted on the approach
chart. At BROWA turn to the final approach course of
133°. Just outside the Final Approach Way Point (FAWP)
AVYUM, the GPS changes to the approach mode and the
CDI becomes even more sensitive. Gulfport approach control
issues instructions to contact Gulfport tower:
“Cessna 30A contact Tower on 123.7.”
“123.7, Cessna 30A.”
“Tower, Cessna 1230A outside AVYUM on the GPS
runway 14.”
“Cessna 30A Gulfport Tower, the ceiling is now 600
overcast and the visibility is 4 miles.”
“Cleared to land runway 14, Cessna 30A.”
Continue the approach, complete the appropriate checklists,
cross AVYUM, and begin the final descent. At 700 feet MSL
visual contact with the airport is possible. Slow the aircraft
and configure it to allow a normal descent to landing. As
touch down is completed, Gulfport Tower gives further
instructions:
“Cessna 30A turn left at taxiway Bravo and contact
ground on 120.4.”
“Roger, Cessna 30A.”
Taxi clear of the runway and complete the appropriate
checklists. The tower automatically cancels the IFR flight
plan.
10-33

10-34