Although the regulations are quite specific, it is a good idea
to be more conservative than the regulations.
Drugs
The Federal Aviation Regulations include no specific
references to medication usage. Two regulations, though,
are important to keep in mind. Title 14 of the CFR part 61,
section 61.53 prohibits acting as pilot-in-command or in any
other capacity as a required pilot flight crewmember, while
that person:
1.
Knows or has reason to know of any medical condition
that would make the person unable to meet the
requirement for the medical certificate necessary for
the pilot operation, or
2.
Is taking medication or receiving other treatment for
a medical condition that results in the person being
unable to meet the requirements for the medical
certificate necessary for the pilot operation.
Further, 14 CFR part 91, section 91.17 prohibits the use
of any drug that affects the person’s faculties in any way
contrary to safety.
There are several thousand medications currently approved
by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA), not
including OTC (over the counter) drugs. Virtually all
medications have the potential for adverse side effects in
some people. Additionally, herbal and dietary supplements,
sport and energy boosters, and some other “natural” products
are derived from substances often found in medications that
could also have adverse side effects. While some individuals
experience no side effects with a particular drug or product,
others may be noticeably affected. The FAA regularly
reviews FDA and other data to assure that medications found
acceptable for aviation duties do not pose an adverse safety
risk. Drugs that cause no apparent side effects on the ground
can create serious problems at even relatively low altitudes.
Even at typical general aviation altitudes, the changes in
concentrations of atmospheric gases in the blood can enhance
the effects of seemingly innocuous drugs that can result in
impaired judgment, decision-making, and performance. In
addition, fatigue, stress, dehydration, and inadequate nutrition
can increase an airman’s susceptibility to adverse effects from
various drugs, even if they appeared to tolerate them in the
past. If multiple medications are being taken at the same time,
the adverse effects can be even more pronounced.
Another important consideration is that the medical
condition for which a medication is prescribed may itself be
disqualifying. The FAA will consider the condition in the
context of risk for medical incapacitation, and the medication
as well for cognitive impairment, and either or both could be
found unacceptable for medical certification.
17-16
Some of the most commonly used OTC drugs, antihistamines
and decongestants, have the potential to cause noticeable
adverse side effects, including drowsiness and cognitive
deficits. The symptoms associated with common
upper respiratory infections, including the common
cold, often suppress a pilot’s desire to fly, and treating
symptoms with a drug that causes adverse side effects
only
compounds
the
problem.
Particularly,
medications
containing
diphenhydramine
(e.g.,
Benadryl) are known to cause drowsiness and have a
prolonged half-life, meaning the drugs stay in one’s system
for an extended time, which lengthens the time that side
effects are present.
Many medications, such as tranquilizers, sedatives, strong
pain relievers, and cough suppressants, have primary
effects that may impair judgment, memory, alertness,
coordination, vision, and the ability to make calculations.
[Figure 17-9] Others, such as antihistamines, blood pressure
drugs, muscle relaxants, and agents to control diarrhea and
motion sickness, have side effects that may impair the same
critical functions. Any medication that depresses the nervous
system, such as a sedative, tranquilizer, or antihistamine, can
make a pilot more susceptible to hypoxia.
Painkillers are grouped into two broad categories: analgesics
and anesthetics. Analgesics are drugs that reduce pain,
while anesthetics are drugs that deaden pain or cause loss
of consciousness.
Over-the-counter analgesics, such as acetylsalicylic
acid (aspirin), acetaminophen (Tylenol), and ibuprofen
(Advil), have few side effects when taken in the
correct dosage. Although some people are allergic to certain
analgesics or may suffer from stomach irritation, flying
usually is not restricted when taking these drugs. However,
flying is almost always precluded while using prescription
analgesics, such as drugs containing propoxyphene (e.g.,
Darvon), oxycodone (e.g., Percodan), meperidine (e.g.,
Demerol), and codeine, since these drugs are known to
cause side effects, such as mental confusion, dizziness,
headaches, nausea, and vision problems.
Anesthetic drugs are commonly used for dental and surgical
procedures. Most local anesthetics used for minor dental and
outpatient procedures wear off within a relatively short period
of time. The anesthetic itself may not limit flying as much
as the actual procedure and subsequent pain.
There is evidence taking illicit drugs significantly elevates
the risk of having an aviation accident. Even though the
Drug
Enforcement
Administration
(DEA)
defines
marijuana as a Schedule I drug on its controlled substances
list, states have taken steps to allow the possession, sale,

this reaction is not their primary function. In some cases,
and use of marijuana withing their border. The
stimulants can produce anxiety and mood swings, both of
FAA has stated, "Marijuana is an illicit drug per
which are dangerous when flying.
federal law and its use by airmen is prohibited."
Depressants are drugs that reduce the body’s functioning in
Stimulants are drugs that excite the central nervous
many areas. These drugs lower blood pressure, reduce mental
system and produce an increase in alertness and activity.
processing, and slow motor and reaction responses. There are
Amphetamines, caffeine, and nicotine are all forms of
several types of drugs that can cause a depressing effect on the
stimulants. Common uses of these drugs include appetite
body, including tranquilizers, motion sickness medication,
suppression, fatigue reduction, and mood elevation. Some
some types of stomach medication, decongestants, and
of these drugs may cause a stimulant reaction, even though
antihistamines. The most common depressant is alcohol.
Generic Or
Treatment
Substance
Possible Side Effects
Brand Name
for
Impaired judgment and perception
N/A
Alcohol
Beer
Impaired coordination and motor control
Liquor
Reduced reaction time
Wine
Impaired sensory perception
Reduced intellectual functions
Reduced tolerance to G-forces
Inner-ear disturbance and spatial disorientation (up to 48 hours)
Central nervous system depression
Sinus and respiratory system infection and irritation
N/A
Nicotine
Cigars
Impaired night vision
Cigarettes
Hypertension
Pipe tobacco
Carbon monoxide poisoning (from smoking)
Chewing tobacco
Snuff
Prolonged wakefulness
Obesity (diet pills)
Amphetamines
Ritalin
Nervousness
Tiredness
Obetrol
Impaired vision
Eskatrol
Suppressed appetite
Shakiness
Excessive sweating
Rapid heart rate
Sleep disturbance
Seriously impaired judgment
Impaired judgment
N/A
Caffeine
Coffee
Reduced reaction time
Tea
Sleep disturbance
Chocolate
Increased motor activity and tremors
No-Doz
Hypertension
Irregular heart rate
Rapid heart rate
Body dehydration (through increased urine output)
Headaches
Liberations of carbon dioxide at altitude (distension may cause
Alka-2
Stomach acids
Antacid
acute abdominal pain and may mask other medical problems)
Di-Gel
Maalox
Drowsiness and dizziness (sometimes recurring)
Allergies
Coricidin
Antihistamines
Visual disturbances (when medications also contain antispasmodic drugs)
Contac
Colds
Dristan
Dimetapp
Omade
Chlor-Trimeton
Diphenhydramine
Irregular body temperature
Bayer
Headaches
Aspirin
Variation in rate and depth of respiration
Bufferin
Fevers
Hypoxia and hyperventilation (two aspirin can contribute to)
Alka-Seltzer
Aches
Nausea, ringing in ears, deafness, diarrhea, and hallucinations when taken in
Pains
excessive dosages
Corrosive action on the stomach lining
Gastrointestinal problems
Decreased clotting ability of the blood (clotting ability could be the difference
between life and death in a survival situation)
Figure 17-9. Adverse affects of various drugs.
17-17

Some drugs that are classified as neither stimulants nor
depressants have adverse effects on flying. For example,
some antibiotics can produce dangerous side effects, such
as balance disorders, hearing loss, nausea, and vomiting.
While many antibiotics are safe for use while flying, the
infection requiring the antibiotic may prohibit flying. In
addition, unless specifically prescribed by a physician, do
not take more than one drug at a time, and never mix drugs
with alcohol because the effects are often unpredictable.
The dangers of illegal drugs also are well documented.
Certain illegal drugs can have hallucinatory effects that occur
days or weeks after the drug is taken. Obviously, these drugs
have no place in the aviation community.
14 CFR prohibits pilots from performing crewmember
duties while using any medication that affects the body in
any way contrary to safety. The safest rule is not to fly as a
crewmember while taking any medication, unless approved to
do so by the FAA. If there is any doubt regarding the effects
of any medication, consult an AME before flying.
Prior to each and every flight, all pilots must do a proper
physical self-assessment to ensure safety. A great mnemonic,
covered in Chapter 2 on Aeronautical Decision-Making,
is IMSAFE, which stands for Illness, Medication, Stress,
Alcohol, Fatigue, and Emotion.
For the medication component of IMSAFE, pilots need to
ask themselves, “Am I taking any medicines that might affect
my judgment or make me drowsy? For any new medication,
OTC or prescribed, you should wait at least 48 hours after
the first dose before flying to determine you do not have any
adverse side effects that would make it unsafe to operate an
aircraft. In addition to medication questions, pilots should
also consider the following –
•
Do not take any unnecessary or elective medications;
•
Make sure you eat regular balanced meals;
•
Bring a snack for both you and your passengers for
the flight;
•
Maintain good hydration - bring plenty of water;
•
Ensure adequate sleep the night prior to the flight; and
•
Stay physically fit.
Additionally, you should wait at least five maximal dosing
intervals, the time between recommended or prescribed
dosing, (e.g., a dosing interval of 5 to 6 hours would require
you to wait 30 hours) before flying after taking any medication
that has potentially adverse side effects (e.g., sedating or
dizziness). Observing the recommended dosing interval
doesn’t eliminate the risk for adverse side effects because
17-18
everyone metabolizes medications differently. However,
five times the dosing interval is a reasonable rule of thumb.
Altitude-Induced Decompression Sickness (DCS)
Decompression sickness (DCS) describes a condition
characterized by a variety of symptoms resulting from
exposure to low barometric pressures that cause inert gases
(mainly nitrogen), normally dissolved in body fluids and
tissues, to come out of physical solution and form bubbles.
Nitrogen is an inert gas normally stored throughout the
human body (tissues and fluids) in physical solution. When
the body is exposed to decreased barometric pressures (as in
flying an unpressurized aircraft to altitude or during a rapid
decompression), the nitrogen dissolved in the body comes out
of solution. If the nitrogen is forced to leave the solution too
rapidly, bubbles form in different areas of the body causing a
variety of signs and symptoms. The most common symptom
is joint pain, which is known as “the bends.” [Figure 17-10]
What to do when altitude-induced DCS occurs:
•
Put on oxygen mask immediately and switch the
regulator to 100 percent oxygen.
•
Begin an emergency descent and land as soon as
possible. Even if the symptoms disappear during
descent, land and seek medical evaluation while
continuing to breathe oxygen.
•
If one of the symptoms is joint pain, keep the affected
area still; do not try to work pain out by moving the
joint around.
•
Upon landing, seek medical assistance from an FAA
medical officer, AME, military flight surgeon, or
a hyperbaric medicine specialist. Be aware that a
physician not specialized in aviation or hypobaric
medicine may not be familiar with this type of medical
problem.
•
Definitive medical treatment may involve the use of
a hyperbaric chamber operated by specially-trained
personnel.
•
Delayed signs and symptoms of altitude-induced DCS
can occur after return to ground level regardless of
presence during flight.
DCS After Scuba Diving
Scuba diving subjects the body to increased pressure, which
allows more nitrogen to dissolve in body tissues and fluids.
[Figure 17-11] The reduction of atmospheric pressure that
accompanies flying can produce physical problems for scuba
divers. A pilot or passenger who intends to fly after scuba
diving should allow the body sufficient time to rid itself of
excess nitrogen absorbed during diving. If not, DCS due to

DCS Type
Bubble Location
Signs and Symptoms (Clinical Manifestations)
BENDS
Mostly large joints
• Localized deep pain, ranging from mild (a “niggle”) to excruciating–sometimes a dull
of the body (elbows,
ache, but rarely a sharp pain
shoulders, hip, wrists,
• Active and passive motion of the joint aggravating the pain
knees, ankles)
• Pain occurring at altitude, during the descent, or many hours later
NEUROLOGIC
Brain
• Confusion or memory loss
Manifestations
• Headache
• Spots in visual field (scotoma), tunnel vision, double vision (diplopia), or blurry vision
• Unexplained extreme fatigue or behavior changes
• Seizures, dizziness, vertigo, nausea, vomiting, and unconsciousness
Spinal cord
• Abnormal sensations, such as burning, stinging, and tingling, around the lower chest
and back
• Symptoms spreading from the feet up and possibly accompanied by ascending
weakness or paralysis
• Girdling abdominal or chest pain
Peripheral nerves
• Urinary and rectal incontinence
• Abnormal sensations, such as numbness, burning, stinging and tingling (paresthesia)
• Muscle weakness or twitching
CHOKES
Lungs
• Burning deep chest pain (under the sternum)
• Pain aggravated by breathing
• Shortness of breath (dyspnea)
• Dry constant cough
SKIN BENDS
Skin
• Itching usually around the ears, face, neck, arms, and upper torso
• Sensation of tiny insects crawling over the skin
• Mottled or marbled skin usually around the shoulders, upper chest, and abdomen
accompanied by itching
• Swelling of the skin, accompanied by tiny scar-like skin depressions (pitting edema)
Figure 17-10. Signs and symptoms of altitude decompression sickness.
evolved gas can occur during exposure to low altitude and
The eye functions much like a camera. Its structure includes
create a serious inflight emergency.
an aperture, a lens, a mechanism for focusing, and a surface
for registering images. Light enters through the cornea at the
The recommended waiting time before going to flight
front of the eyeball, travels through the lens, and falls on the
altitudes of up to 8,000 feet is at least 12 hours after diving
retina. The retina contains light sensitive cells that convert
that does not require controlled ascent (nondecompression
stop diving), and at least 24 hours after diving that does
require controlled ascent (decompression stop diving). The
waiting time before going to flight altitudes above 8,000
feet should be at least 24 hours after any scuba dive. These
recommended altitudes are actual flight altitudes above
mean sea level (MSL) and not pressurized cabin altitudes.
This takes into consideration the risk of decompression of
the aircraft during flight.
Vision in Flight
Of all the senses, vision is the most important for safe flight.
Most of the things perceived while flying are visual or heavily
supplemented by vision. As remarkable and vital as it is,
vision is subject to limitations, such as illusions and blind
spots. The more a pilot understands about the eyes and how
Figure 17-11. To avoid the bends, scuba divers must not fly for
they function, the easier it is to use vision effectively and
specific time periods following dives.
compensate for potential problems.
17-19

iy
The rods and
daylight or when a high level of artificial illumination exists. @
cones (film) of
Rods and
the retina are
~~.
cones
the receptors
which record
if
the image and
transmit it
A
through the
Fovea
|
Fovea centralis
optic nerve to
(all cones)
the brain for
”
interpretation.
Rod
Lens
nan
concentration
-
Optic disk
(blind spot)
-
Iris
*
at
Gam,
Optic nerve
Retina
PUPIL
CORNEA
The pupil (aperture) is the opening at
Light passes through the cornea (the
the center of the iris. The size of the
transparent window on the front of the
eye) and then through the lens to
pupil is adjusted to control the amount
of light entering the eye.
focus on the retina.
Figure 17-12. The human eye.
light energy into electrical impulses that travel through nerves
that a large amount of light overwhelms them, and they take
to the brain. The brain interprets the electrical signals to form
longer to “reset” and adapt to the dark again. There are so
images. There are two kinds of light-sensitive cells in the
many cones in the fovea that are at the very center of the
eyes: rods and cones. [Figure 17-12]
visual field but virtually has no rods at all. So in low light,
the middle of the visual field is not very sensitive, but farther
The cones are responsible for all color vision, from
from the fovea, the rods are more numerous and provide the
appreciating a glorious sunset to discerning the subtle shades
major portion of night vision.
in a fine painting. Cones are present throughout the retina, but
Vision Types
are concentrated toward the center of the field of vision at the
back of the retina. There is a small pit called the fovea where
There are three types of vision: photopic, mesopic, and
almost all the light sensing cells are cones. This is the area
scotopic. Each type functions under different sensory stimuli
where most “looking” occurs (the center of the visual field
or ambient light conditions. [Figure 17-13]
where detail, color sensitivity, and resolution are highest).
Photopic Vision
While the cones and their associated nerves are well suited
Photopic vision provides the capability for seeing color and
to detecting fine detail and color in high light levels, the
resolving fine detail (20/20 or better), but it functions only
rods are better able to detect movement and provide vision
in good illumination. Photopic vision is experienced during
in dim light. The rods are unable to discern color but are
very sensitive at low-light levels. The trouble with rods is
Types of Vision
Types of vision used
Light level
Technique of viewing
Color perception
Receptors used
Acuity best
Blind spot
Photopic
High
Central
Good
Cones
20/20
Day
Mesopic
Medium/Low
Both
Some
Cones/Rods
Varies
Day/Night
Scotopic
Low
Scanning
None
Rods
20/200
Day/Night
Figure 17-13. Types of vision.
17-20

The cones concentrated in the fovea centralis of the eye are
primarily responsible for vision in bright light. [Figure 17-12]
Because of the high light level, rhodopsin, which is a
biological pigment of the retina that is responsible for both
the formation of the photoreceptor cells and the first events
in the perception of light, is bleached out causing the rod
cells to become less effective.
Mesopic Vision
Mesopic vision is achieved by a combination of rods and
cones and is experienced at dawn, dusk, and during full
moonlight. Visual acuity steadily decreases as available light
decreases and color perception changes because the cones
become less effective. Mesopic viewing period is considered
the most dangerous period for viewing. As cone sensitivity
decreases, pilots should use off-center vision and proper
scanning techniques to detect objects during low-light levels.
Scotopic Vision
Scotopic vision is experienced under low-light levels and
the cones become ineffective, resulting in poor resolution of
detail. Visual acuity decreases to 20/200 or less and enables
a person to see only objects the size of or larger than the
big “E” on visual acuity testing charts from 20 feet away.
In other words, a person must stand at 20 feet to see what
can normally be seen at 200 feet under daylight conditions.
When using scotopic vision, color perception is lost and a
night blind spot in the central field of view appears at low
light levels when the cone-cell sensitivity is lost.
Central Blind Spot
The area where the optic nerve connects to the retina in the
back of each eye is known as the optic disk. There is a total
absence of cones and rods in this area, and consequently,
each eye is completely blind in this spot. [Figure 17-14]
As a result, it is referred to as the blind spot that everyone
ae)
Figure 17-15. The eye’s blind spot.
Center of vision
Blind spot
a
Pupil
Retina
_
|
Optic nerve
LEFT
Right
Figure 17-14. Central blind spot.
has in each eye. Under normal binocular vision conditions
(both eyes are used together), this is not a problem because
an object cannot be in the blind spot of both eyes at the same
time. On the other hand, where the field of vision of one eye
is obstructed by an object (windshield divider or another
aircraft), a visual target could fall in the blind spot of the
other eye and remain undetected.
Figure 17-15 provides a dramatic example of the eye’s
blind spot.
1.
Hold this page at an arm’s length.
2.
Completely cover your left eye (without closing or
pressing on it) using your hand or other flat object.
3.
With your right eye, stare directly at the airplane on
the left side of the picture page. In your periphery, you
will notice the black X on the right side of the picture.
4.
Slowly move the page closer to you while continuing
to stare at the airplane.
|
hee
fh ae
.
17-21

5.
When the page is about 16–18 inches from you, the
black X should disappear completely because it has
been imaged onto the blind spot of your right eye.
(Resist the temptation to move your right eye while
the black X is gone or else it reappears. Keep staring
at the airplane.)
6.
As you continue to look at the airplane, keep moving
the page closer to you a few more inches, and the black
X will come back into view.
7.
There is an interval where you are able to move the
page a few inches backward and forward, and the black
X will be gone. This demonstrates to you the extent
of your blind spot.
8.
You can try the same thing again, except this time with
your right eye covered stare at the black X with your
left eye. Move the page in closer and the airplane will
disappear.
Another way to check your blind spot is to do a similar test
outside at night when there is a full moon. Cover your left
eye, looking at the full moon with your right eye. Gradually
move your right eye to the left (and maybe slightly up or
down). Before long, all you will be able to see is the large
halo around the full moon; the entire moon itself will seem
to have disappeared.
Empty-Field Myopia
Empty-field myopia is a condition that usually occurs when
flying above the clouds or in a haze layer that provides
nothing specific to focus on outside the aircraft. This causes
the eyes to relax and seek a comfortable focal distance that
may range from 10 to 30 feet. For the pilot, this means
looking without seeing, which is dangerous. Searching out
and focusing on distant light sources, no matter how dim,
helps prevent the onset of empty-field myopia.
Night Vision
There are many good reasons to fly at night, but pilots must
keep in mind that the risks of night flying are different than
during the day and often times higher. [Figure 17-16] Pilots
who are cautious and educated on night-flying techniques
can mitigate those risks and become very comfortable and
proficient in the task.
Night Blind Spot
It is estimated that once fully adapted to darkness, the rods are
10,000 times more sensitive to light than the cones, making
them the primary receptors for night vision. Since the cones
are concentrated near the fovea, the rods are also responsible
for much of the peripheral vision. The concentration of cones
in the fovea can make a night blind spot in the center of the
field of vision. To see an object clearly at night, the pilot must
17-22
a9
Figure 17-16. Night vision.
expose the rods to the image. This can be done by looking 5°
to 10° off center of the object to be seen. This can be tried in
a dim light in a darkened room. When looking directly at the
light, it dims or disappears altogether. When looking slightly
off center, it becomes clearer and brighter.
When looking directly at an object, the image is focused
mainly on the fovea, where detail is best seen. At night, the
ability to see an object in the center of the visual field is
reduced as the cones lose much of their sensitivity and the
rods become more sensitive. Looking off center can help
compensate for this night blind spot. Along with the loss of
—
@®
/
-
Cones active
_
@®
/
Night blind spot
-
Rods active
Pilots must look 5°–10° off center of the
object in order for the object to be seen.
Figure 17-17. Night blind spot.

sharpness (acuity) and color at night, depth perception and
judgment of size may be lost. [Figure 17-17]
Dark Adaptation
Dark adaptation is the adjustment of the human eye to a dark
environment. That adjustment takes longer depending on the
amount of light in the environment that a person has just left.
Moving from a bright room into a dark one takes longer than
moving from a dim room and going into a dark one.
While the cones adapt rapidly to changes in light intensities,
the rods take much longer. Walking from bright sunlight into
a dark movie theater is an example of this dark adaptation
period experience. The rods can take approximately 30
minutes to fully adapt to darkness. A bright light, however,
can completely destroy night adaptation, leaving night
vision severely compromised while the adaptation process
is repeated.
Scanning Techniques
Scanning techniques are very important in identifying objects
at night. To scan effectively, pilots must look from right to
left or left to right. They should begin scanning at the greatest
distance an object can be perceived (top) and move inward
toward the position of the aircraft (bottom). For each stop, an
area approximately 30° wide should be scanned. The duration
of each stop is based on the degree of detail that is required,
but no stop should last longer than 2 to 3 seconds. When
_
=
Figure 17-18. Scanning techniques.
moving from one viewing point to the next, pilots should
overlap the previous field of view by 10°. [Figure 17-18]
Off-center viewing is another type of scan that pilots can use
during night flying. It is a technique that requires an object be
viewed by looking 10° above, below, or to either side of the
object. [Figure 17-19] In this manner, the peripheral vision
can maintain contact with an object.
With off-center vision, the images of an object viewed longer
than 2 to 3 seconds will disappear. This occurs because the
rods reach a photochemical equilibrium that prevents any
further response until the scene changes. This produces
a potentially unsafe operating condition. To overcome
this night vision limitation, pilots must be aware of the
phenomenon and avoid viewing an object for longer than 2
or 3 seconds. The peripheral field of vision will continue to
pick up the object when the eyes are shifted from one off-
center point to another.
Night Vision Protection
Several things can be done to help with the dark adaptation
process and to keep the eyes adapted to darkness. Some of
the steps pilots and flight crews can take to protect their night
vision are described in the following paragraphs.
10°
@
@
FrSY
og
@
@
Giii>
=a
17-23

——
Focal points
> |
ty
X
10 degrees
—
X
X
X
OBSERVER
10 degrees
10 degrees
Once an object is detected in the peripheral field of dark-
adapted vision, continued surveillance is maintained by
use of “off-center” vision. Looking 10° right or left and
above and below the object, viewing no longer than 2 to
3 seconds at each position.
X
10 degrees
Figure 17-19. Off-center viewing.
Sunglasses
High Intensity Lighting
If a night flight is scheduled, pilots and crew members should
If, during the flight, any high intensity lighting areas are
wear neutral density (N-15) sunglasses or equivalent filter
encountered, attempt to turn the aircraft away and fly in the
lenses when exposed to bright sunlight. This precaution
periphery of the lighted area. This will not expose the eyes to
increases the rate of dark adaptation at night and improves
such a large amount of light all at once. If possible, plan your
night visual sensitivity.
route to avoid direct over flight of built-up, brightly lit areas.
Oxygen Supply
Flightdeck Lighting
Unaided night vision depends on optimum function and
Flightdeck lighting should be kept as low as possible so that
sensitivity of the rods of the retina. Lack of oxygen to the rods
the light does not monopolize night vision. After reaching
(hypoxia) significantly reduces their sensitivity. Sharp clear
the desired flight altitude, pilots should allow time to
vision (with the best being equal to 20–20 vision) requires
adjust to the flight conditions. This includes readjustment
significant oxygen especially at night. Without supplemental
of instrument lights and orientation to outside references.
oxygen, an individual’s night vision declines measurably at
During the adjustment period, night vision should continue
pressure altitudes above 4,000 feet. As altitude increases,
to improve until optimum night adaptation is achieved. When
the available oxygen decreases, degrading night vision.
it is necessary to read maps, charts, and checklists, use a dim
Compounding the problem is fatigue, which minimizes
white light flashlight and avoid shining it in your or any other
physiological well being. Adding fatigue to high altitude
crewmember’s eyes.
exposure is a recipe for disaster. In fact, if flying at night at
an altitude of 12,000 feet, the pilot may actually see elements
Airfield Precautions
of his or her normal vision missing or not in focus. Missing
Often time, pilots have no say in how airfield operations are
visual elements resemble the missing pixels in a digital image
handled, but listed below are some precautions that can be
while unfocused vision is dim and washed out.
taken to make night flying safer and help protect night vision.
•
Airfield lighting should be reduced to the lowest
For the pilot suffering the effects of hypoxic hypoxia, a simple
usable intensity.
descent to a lower altitude may not be sufficient to reestablish
vision. For example, a climb from 8,000 feet to 12,000 feet for
•
Maintenance personnel should practice light discipline
30 minutes does not mean a descent to 8,000 feet will rectify
with headlights and flashlights.
the problem. Visual acuity may not be regained for over an
•
Position the aircraft at a part of the airfield where the
hour. Thus, it is important to remember, altitude and fatigue
least amount of lighting exists.
have a profound effect on a pilot’s ability to see.
17-24

•
Select approach and departure routes that avoid
highways and residential areas where illumination
can impair night vision.
Self-Imposed Stress
Night flight can be more fatiguing and stressful than day
flight, and many self- imposed stressors can limit night vision.
Pilots can control this type of stress by knowing the factors
that can cause self-imposed stressors. Some of these factors
are listed in the following paragraphs. [Figure 17-20]
Drugs
Drugs can seriously degrade visual acuity during the day and
especially at night. Pilots who become ill should consult an
aviation medical examiner (AME) or flight surgeon as to
which drugs are appropriate to take while flying.
Exhaustion
Pilots who become fatigued during a night flight will not be
mentally alert and will respond more slowly to situations
requiring immediate action. Exhausted pilots tend to
concentrate on one aspect of a situation without considering
the total requirement. Their performance may become a
safety hazard depending on the degree of fatigue and instead
of using proper scanning techniques may get fixated on the
instruments or stare off rather than multitask.
Poor Physical Conditioning
To overcome poor physical conditioning, pilots should
participate in regular exercise programs. People who are
physically fit become less fatigued during flight and have
better night scanning efficiency. However, too much exercise
in a given day may leave crew members too fatigued for
night flying.
Alcohol
Alcohol is a sedative and its use impairs both coordination
and judgment. As a result, pilots who are impaired by alcohol
fail to apply the proper techniques of night vision. They are
likely to stare at objects and to neglect scanning techniques.
The amount of alcohol consumed determines the degree to
which night vision is affected. The effects of alcohol are long
lasting and the residual effects of alcohol can also impair
visual scanning efficiency.
Tobacco
Of all the self-imposed stressors, cigarette smoking most
decreases visual sensitivity at night. Smoking significantly
increases the amount of carbon monoxide carried by the
hemoglobin in red blood cells. This reduces the blood’s
capacity to combine with oxygen, so less oxygen is carried
in the blood. Hypoxia caused by carbon monoxide poisoning
HYPOGLYCEMIA
HYPOGLYCEMIA
HYPOGLYCEMIA
HYPOGLYCEMIA
DRUGS
DRUGS
DRUGS
DRUGS
NUTRITIONAL
NUTRITIONAL
NUTRITIONAL
NUTRITIONAL
EXHAUSTION
EXHAUSTION
EXHAUSTION
EXHAUSTION
DEFICIENCY
DEFICIENCY
DEFICIENCY
DEFICIENCY
POOR PHYSICAL
POOL PHYSICAL
POOR PHYSICAL
CONDITION
CONDITION
CONDITION
TOBACCO
TOBACCO
TOBACCO
TOBACCO
ALCOHOL
ALCOHOL
ALCOHOL
ALCOHOL
Figure 17-20. Self-imposed stress.
affects peripheral vision and dark adaptation. The results
are the same as those for hypoxia caused by high altitude.
Smoking 3 cigarettes in rapid succession or 20 to 30 cigarettes
within a 24-hour period may saturate from 8 to 10 percent
of the capacity of hemoglobin. Smokers lose 20 percent of
their night vision capability at sea level, which is equal to a
physiological altitude of 5,000 feet.
Hypoglycemia and Nutritional Deficiency
Missing or postponing meals can cause low blood sugar,
which impairs night flight performance. Low blood sugar
levels may result in stomach contractions, distraction,
breakdown in habit pattern, and a shortened attention span.
Likewise, an insufficient consumption of vitamin A may
also impair night vision. Foods high in vitamin A include
eggs, butter, cheese, liver, apricots, peaches, carrots, squash,
spinach, peas, and most types of greens. High quantities of
vitamin A do not increase night vision but a lack of vitamin
A certainly impairs it.
Distance Estimation and Depth Perception
Knowledge of the mechanisms and cues affecting distance
estimation and depth perception assist pilots in judging
distances at night. These cues may be monocular or binocular.
The monocular cues that aid in distance estimation and depth
perception include motion parallax, geometric perspective,
retinal image size, and aerial perspective.
Motion Parallax
Motion parallax refers to the apparent motion of stationary
objects as viewed by an observer moving across the
landscape. When the pilot or crewmember looks outside the
aircraft perpendicular to the direction of travel, near objects
appear to move backward, past, or opposite the path of
motion; far objects seem to move in the direction of motion
or remain fixed. The rate of apparent movement depends on
the distance the observer is from the object.
17-25

make an obvious difference in the viewing angle of both eyes.
Geometric Perspective
In the flight environment, most distances outside the cockpit
An object may appear to have a different shape when viewed
are so great that binocular cues are of little, if any, value. In
at varying distances and from different angles. Geometric
addition, binocular cues operate on a more subconscious
perspective cues include linear perspective, apparent
level than monocular cues and are performed automatically.
foreshortening, and vertical position in the field.
•
Linear perspective—parallel lines, such as runway
Night Vision Illusions
lights, power lines and railroad tracks, tend to
There are many different types of visual illusions that
converge as distance from the observer increases.
commonly occur at night. Anticipating and maintaining
[Figure 17-21A]
awareness of them is usually the best way to avoid them.
•
Apparent foreshortening—the true shape of an object
or a terrain feature appears elliptical when viewed
Autokinesis
from a distance. [Figure 17-21B]
Autokinesis is caused by staring at a single point of light
•
Vertical position in the field—objects or terrain
against a dark background for more than a few seconds.
features farther away from the observer appear higher
After a few moments, the light appears to move on its own.
on the horizon than those closer to the observer.
Apparent movement of the light source will begin in about
8 to 10 seconds. To prevent this illusion, focus the eyes on
[Figure 17-21C]
objects at varying distances and avoid fixating on one source
of light. This illusion can be eliminated or reduced by visual
Aerial Perspective
scanning, by increasing the number of lights, or by varying
The clarity of an object and the shadow cast by it are
the light intensity. The most important of the three solutions
perceived by the brain and are cues for estimating distance.
is visual scanning. A light or lights should not be stared at
Subtle variations in color or shade are clearer the closer the
for more than 10 seconds.
observer is to an object. However, as distance increases,
these distinctions may become blurry. The same applies to
False Horizon
an object detail or texture. As a person gets farther from an
object, its discrete details become less apparent. Another
A false horizon can occur when the natural horizon is
important fact to remember while flying at night is that every
obscured or not readily apparent. It can be generated by
object casts a shadow from a light source. The direction in
confusing bright stars and city lights. It can also occur while
which the shadow is cast depends on the position of the light
flying toward the shore of an ocean or a large lake. Because
source. If the shadow of an object is cast toward the observer,
of the relative darkness of the water, the lights along the
the object is closer than the light source is to the observer.
shoreline can be mistaken for stars in the sky. [Figure 17-22]
Binocular Cues
Reversible Perspective Illusion
Binocular cues of an object are dependent upon the slightly
At night, an aircraft may appear to be moving away from
different viewing angle of each eye of an object. Binocular
a second aircraft when it is, in fact, approaching a second
perception is useful only when the object is close enough to
aircraft. This illusion often occurs when an aircraft is flying
-_
—
———
——
>
a
a
>
A
B
C
|
A
a
|
-
-_
_
——
-
>
|
A
>
aa
ii
-
-
-
-
_
ZZ
_
|
>
-
>
A
Zz
-
—
—_
dt
Figure 17-21. Geometric perspective.
17-26

Actual horizon
Apparent horizon
Pe)|e
e060 eee "9
Figure 17-22. At night, the horizon may be hard to discern due to dark terrain and misleading light patterns on the ground.
parallel to another’s course. To determine the direction of
steep surrounding terrain, and a wide runway can produce the
,
aaa
ES gi ESE! Pa
flight, pilots should observe aircraft lights and their relative
illusion of being too low with a tendency to fly a higher-than-
position to the horizon. If the intensity of the lights increases,
normal approach. A set of regularly spaced lights along a road
the aircraft is approaching; if the lights dim, the aircraft is
or highway can appear to be runway lights. Pilots have even
moving away.
mistaken the lights on moving trains as runway or approach
lights. Bright runway or approach lighting systems can create
Size-Distance Illusion
the illusion that the aircraft is closer to the runway, especially
where few lights illuminate the surrounding terrain.
This illusion results from viewing a source of light that is
increasing or decreasing in luminance (brightness). Pilots
Prior to flying at night, it is best to learn and know the
may interpret the light as approaching or retreating.
challenges of the area in which you are flying in. Study the
area and know how to navigate your way through areas that
Fascination (Fixation)
may pose a problem at night. For example, many areas near
This illusion occurs when pilots ignore orientation cues and
water may be obscured by low lying clouds or fog. To help
fix their attention on a goal or an object. Student pilots tend to
deal with this type of situation, it is important to have a plan
have this happen when they are concentrating on the aircraft
before you leave the ground. In the daytime, fly the routes
instruments or attempting to land. They become fixated on
and passes that you will be flying at night and determine the
one task and forget to look at what is going on around them.
minimum altitude you are willing to use at night. If weather
At night, this can be especially dangerous because aircraft
prevents you from maintaining the altitude that you planned,
ground-closure rates are difficult to determine, and there may
make a decision early to turn 180° and land at an alternate
be minimal time to correct the situation.
airport with better weather conditions. Always consider
safer alternatives rather than hope things will work out by
Flicker Vertigo
taking a chance.
A light flickering at a rate between 4 and 20 cycles per
second can produce unpleasant and dangerous reactions. Such
Pilots who fly at night should strongly consider oxygen
conditions as nausea, vomiting, and vertigo may occur. On
supplementation at altitudes and times not required by the
rare occasions, convulsions and unconsciousness may also
FAA, especially at night when critical judgment and hand-eye
occur. Proper scanning techniques at night can prevent pilots
coordination is necessary (e.g., IFR) or if he/she is a smoker
from getting flicker vertigo.
or not perfectly healthy.
Night Landing Illusions
Enhanced Night Vision Systems
Landing illusions occur in many forms. Above featureless
Synthetic Vision Systems (SVS) and Enhanced Flight Vision
terrain at night, there is a natural tendency to fly a lower-
Systems (EFVS) are two systems that can improve the safety
than-normal approach. Elements that cause any type of
of flight at night. The technology of both is evolving rapidly
visual obscurities, such as rain, haze, or a dark runway
and being used more and more. [Figure 17-23]
environment, can also cause low approaches. Bright lights,
17-27

Synthetic vision system
Enhanced vision system
—
a
,
—|
——
Figure 17-23. Synthetic and enhanced vision systems.
Synthetic Vision System
obvious advantages of SVS are that the digital terrain image
remains on the pilot’s display regardless of how poor the
A Synthetic Vision System (SVS) is an electronic means
visibility is outside.
to display a synthetic vision image of the external scene
topography to the flight crew. [Figure 17-24] It is not a
An SVS image can be displayed on either a head-down
real-time image like that produced by an EFVS. Unlike
display or head-up display (HUD); however, to date, SVS
EFVS, SVS requires a terrain and obstacle database, a
has only been certified on head-down displays. Development
precise navigation solution, and a display. The terrain
efforts to display a synthetic image on a HUD are currently
image is based on the use of data from a Digital Elevation
underway as are efforts that would combine SVS with a real-
Model (DEM) that is stored within the SVS. With SVS, the
time sensor image produced by an EFVS. These systems are
synthetic terrain/vision image is intended to enhance pilot
known as Combined Vision Systems. While SVS is currently
awareness of spatial position relative to important features
certified as an aid to situation awareness only, the FAA
in all visibility conditions. This is particularly useful during
and aviation industry are working on defining operational
critical phases of flight, such as takeoff, approach, and
concepts and airworthiness criteria that would enable SVS
landing, where important features, such as terrain, obstacles,
to be used for operational credit in certain low visibility
runways, and landmarks, may be depicted on the SVS
conditions. Other future enhancements to SVS displays could
display. [Figure 17-25] During approach operations, the
include integrating ADS-B to display traffic information.
=15
Laat?
Enhanced Flight Vision System
a0
Enhanced Vision (EV) or Enhanced Flight Vision System
(EFVS) is an electronic means to provide a display of
A
‘
=
Sey
ae,
at ea
off
ie
)
om
-
.
med)
— —_an)
+100
Se OS
—
———— Be
rs
a
:
5 ee
=
=
=
z
rea
+
=>
>
fF
B00
a.)
Hy =-10
-
=.
mdi
yoo
-a-10
|
sia
ropes
800. US
>»
>.
4+
Figure 17-25. Night time SVS system.
Figure 17-24. SVS system.
17-28

the external scene by use of an imaging sensor, such as
a Forward-Looking InfraRed (FLIR) or millimeter wave
radar (MMWR). In 2004, 14 CFR part 91, section 91.175
was amended to reflect that operators conducting straight-
in instrument approach procedures (in other than Category
II or Category III operations) may now operate below the
published decision height (DH) or minimum descent altitude
(MDA) when using an approved EFVS shown on the pilot’s
HUD. This rule change provides “operational credit” for EV
equipage. No such credit exists for SV.
Chapter Summary
This chapter provides an introduction to aeromedical factors
relating to flight activities. More detailed information on
the subjects discussed in this chapter is available in the
Aeronautical Information Manual (AIM) and online at www.
faa.gov.
17-29

17-30