Chapter 3
Human
Factors
Introduction
Human factors is a broad field that examines the interaction
between people, machines, and the environment for the
purpose of improving performance and reducing errors. As
aircraft became more reliable and less prone to mechanical
failure, the percentage of accidents related to human factors
increased. Some aspect of human factors now accounts for
over 80 percent of all accidents. Pilots, who have a good
understanding of human factors, are better equipped to plan
and execute a safe and uneventful flight.
Flying in instrument meteorological conditions (IMC) can
result in sensations that are misleading to the body’s sensory
system. A safe pilot needs to understand these sensations and
effectively counteract them. Instrument flying requires a pilot
to make decisions using all available resources.
The elements of human factors covered in this chapter include
sensory systems used for orientation and illusions in flight.
For more information about physiological and psychological
factors, medical factors, aeronautical decision-making
(ADM), and crew resource management (CRM), refer to the
Pilot’s Handbook of Aeronautical Knowledge.
3-1

Sensory Systems for Orientation
Orientation is the awareness of the position of the aircraft
and of oneself in relation to a specific reference point.
Disorientation is the lack of orientation, and spatial
disorientation specifically refers to the lack of orientation
with regard to position in space and to other objects.
Orientation is maintained through the body’s sensory organs
in three areas: visual, vestibular, and postural. The eyes
maintain visual orientation. The motion sensing system in
the inner ear maintains vestibular orientation. The nerves in
the skin, joints, and muscles of the body maintain postural
orientation. When healthy human beings are in their natural
environment, these three systems work well. When the
human body is subjected to the forces of flight, these senses
can provide misleading information. It is this misleading
information that causes pilots to become disoriented.
Eyes
Of all the senses, vision is most important in providing
information to maintain safe flight. Even though the human
eye is optimized for day vision, it is also capable of vision
in very low light environments. During the day, the eye uses
receptors called cones, while at night, vision is facilitated
by the use of rods. Both of
these provide a level of vision
optimized for the lighting
conditions that they were
intended. That is, cones are
ineffective at night and rods
are ineffective during the day.
Rods, which contain rhodopsin
(called visual purple), are
especially sensitive to light
and increased light washes out
the rhodopsin compromising
the night vision. Hence, when
strong light is momentarily
introduced at night, vision
may be totally ineffective as
the rods take time to become
effective again in darkness.
Smoking, alcohol, oxygen
deprivation, and age affect
vision, especially at night. It
should be noted that at night,
oxygen deprivation, such
as one caused from a climb
to a high altitude, causes a
significant reduction in vision.
A return back to the lower
3-2
Figure 3-1. Rubik’s cube graphic depicting the visual processing of information.
altitude does not restore a pilot’s vision in the same transitory
period used at the climb altitude.
The eye also has two blind spots. The day blind spot is the
location on the light sensitive retina where the optic nerve
fiber bundle (which carries messages from the eye to the
brain) passes through. This location has no light receptors,
and a message cannot be created there to be sent to the brain.
The night blind spot is due to a concentration of cones in an
area surrounding the fovea on the retina. Because there are
no rods in this area, direct vision on an object at night will
disappear. As a result, off-center viewing and scanning at
night is best for both obstacle avoidance and to maximize
situational awareness (SA). (See the Pilot’s Handbook of
Aeronautical Knowledge and the Aeronautical Information
Manual (AIM) for detailed reading.)
The brain also processes visual information based upon color,
relationship of colors, and vision from objects around us.
Figure 3-1 demonstrates the visual processing of information.
The brain assigns color based on many items, to include an
object’s surroundings. In the figure below, the orange square
on the shaded side of the cube is actually the same color
as the brown square in the center of the cube’s top face.

Isolating the orange square from surrounding influences
will reveal that it is actually brown. The application to a real
environment is evident when processing visual information
that is influenced by surroundings. The ability to pick out an
airport in varied terrain or another aircraft in a light haze are
examples of problems with interpretation that make vigilance
all the more necessary.
Figure 3-2 illustrates problems with perception. Both tables
are the same lengths. Objects are easily misinterpreted in
size to include both length and width. Being accustomed to
a 75-foot-wide runway on flat terrain is most likely going to
influence a pilot’s perception of a wider runway on uneven
terrain simply because of the inherent processing experience.
Vision Under Dim and Bright Illumination
Under conditions of dim illumination, aeronautical charts and
aircraft instruments can become unreadable unless adequate
flight deck lighting is available. In darkness, vision becomes
more sensitive to light. This process is called dark adaptation.
Although exposure to total darkness for at least 30 minutes is
required for complete dark adaptation, a pilot can achieve a
moderate degree of dark adaptation within 20 minutes under
dim red flight deck lighting.
Red light distorts colors (filters the red spectrum), especially
on aeronautical charts, and makes it very difficult for the
eyes to focus on objects inside the aircraft. Pilots should
use it only where optimum outside night vision capability is
Figure 3-2. Shepard’s tables illustrating problems with perception as both tables are the same length.
necessary. White flight deck lighting (dim lighting) should
be available when needed for map and instrument reading,
especially under IMC conditions.
Since any degree of dark adaptation is lost within a few
seconds of viewing a bright light, pilots should close one eye
when using a light to preserve some degree of night vision.
During night flights in the vicinity of lightning, flight deck
lights should be turned up to help prevent loss of night vision
due to the bright flashes. Dark adaptation is also impaired by
exposure to cabin pressure altitudes above 5,000 feet, carbon
monoxide inhaled through smoking, deficiency of Vitamin
A in the diet, and prolonged exposure to bright sunlight.
During flight in visual meteorological conditions (VMC),
the eyes are the major orientation source and usually
provide accurate and reliable information. Visual cues
usually prevail over false sensations from other sensory
systems. When these visual cues are taken away, as they
are in IMC, false sensations can cause the pilot to quickly
become disoriented.
An effective way to counter these false sensations is to
recognize the problem, disregard the false sensations, rely
on the flight instruments, and use the eyes to determine the
aircraft attitude. The pilot must have an understanding of
the problem and the skill to control the aircraft using only
instrument indications.
3-3

Ears
To illustrate what happens during a turn, visualize the
aircraft in straight-and-level flight. With no acceleration of
The inner ear has two major parts concerned with orientation:
the aircraft, the hair cells are upright, and the body senses
the semicircular canals and the otolith organs. [Figure 3-3] The
that no turn has occurred. Therefore, the position of the hair
semicircular canals detect angular acceleration of the body,
cells and the actual sensation correspond.
while the otolith organs detect linear acceleration and gravity.
The semicircular canals consist of three tubes at approximate
Placing the aircraft into a turn puts the semicircular canal and
right angles to each other, each located on one of three axes:
its fluid into motion, with the fluid within the semicircular
pitch, roll, or yaw as illustrated in Figure 3-4. Each canal is
canal lagging behind the accelerated canal walls. [Figure 3-5]
filled with a fluid called endolymph fluid. In the center of
This lag creates a relative movement of the fluid within the
the canal is the cupola, a gelatinous structure that rests upon
canal. The canal wall and the cupula move in the opposite
sensory hairs located at the end of the vestibular nerves. It
direction from the motion of the fluid.
is the movement of these hairs within the fluid that causes
sensations of motion.
The brain interprets the movement of the hairs to be a turn in
the same direction as the canal wall. The body correctly senses
Because of the friction between the fluid and the canal, it
that a turn is being made. If the turn continues at a constant
may take about 15–20 seconds for the fluid in the ear canal
rate for several seconds or longer, the motion of the fluid in
to reach the same speed as the canal’s motion.
Semicircular canals
Tubular ducts
containing endolymph
The motion sensing system is
Utricle
located in each inner ear in the
Saccule
approximate position shown.
Cochlea
Ampullae
Cupola
Semicircular canals
Ampulla of a
Otolith organ
semicircular
canal
Cupola
Sensory hairs
Filaments of hair cells
Hair cells
Endolymph fluid
Vestibular nerve
Vestibular nerve
Figure 3-3. Inner ear orientation.
The semicircular tubes are
YAW
arranged at approximately
right angles to each other, in
the roll, pitch, and yaw axes.
ROLL
PITCH
Bone
Bone
PITCH
ROLL
Ear canal
Ear canal
Eardrum
Eardrum
Eustachian tube
Eustachian tube
YAW
Figure 3-4. Angular acceleration and the semicircular tubes.
3-4

Endolymph
Cupola
Tube
Turn stopped
Constant rate turn
No turning
Start of turn
Sensation of turning in
No sensation after fluid
No sensation.
Sensation of turning
opposite direction as moving
accelerates to same
as moving fluid deflects
fluid deflects hairs in opposite
speed as tube wall.
hairs.
direction.
Figure 3-5. Angular acceleration.
the canals catches up with the canal walls. The hairs are no
longer bent, and the brain receives the false impression that
turning has stopped. Thus, the position of the hair cells and
the resulting sensation during a prolonged, constant turn in
either direction results in the false sensation of no turn.
Normal
When the aircraft returns to straight-and-level flight, the fluid
in the canal moves briefly in the opposite direction. This sends
a signal to the brain that is falsely interpreted as movement
in the opposite direction. In an attempt to correct the falsely
perceived turn, the pilot may reenter the turn placing the
aircraft in an out-of-control situation.
Head tilted back
The otolith organs detect linear acceleration and gravity in a
similar way. Instead of being filled with a fluid, a gelatinous
membrane containing chalk-like crystals covers the sensory
hairs. When the pilot tilts his or her head, the weight of these
crystals causes this membrane to shift due to gravity, and
the sensory hairs detect this shift. The brain orients this new
position to what it perceives as vertical. Acceleration and
Accelerating
deceleration also cause the membrane to shift in a similar
manner. Forward acceleration gives the illusion of the head
Figure 3-6. Linear acceleration.
tilting backward. [Figure 3-6] As a result, during takeoff and
Illusions Leading to Spatial
while accelerating, the pilot may sense a steeper than normal
Disorientation
climb resulting in a tendency to nose-down.
The sensory system responsible for most of the illusions
Nerves
leading to spatial disorientation is the vestibular system.
Nerves in the body’s skin, muscles, and joints constantly
Visual illusions can also cause spatial disorientation.
send signals to the brain, which signals the body’s relation to
Vestibular Illusions
gravity. These signals tell the pilot his or her current position.
The Leans
Acceleration is felt as the pilot is pushed back into the seat.
Forces, created in turns, can lead to false sensations of the
A condition called “the leans” can result when a banked
true direction of gravity and may give the pilot a false sense
attitude, to the left for example, may be entered too slowly
of which way is up.
to set in motion the fluid in the “roll” semicircular tubes.
[Figure 3-5] An abrupt correction of this attitude sets the
Uncoordinated turns, especially climbing turns, can cause
fluid in motion, creating the illusion of a banked attitude to
misleading signals to be sent to the brain. Skids and slips
the right. The disoriented pilot may make the error of rolling
give the sensation of banking or tilting. Turbulence can create
the aircraft into the original left banked attitude, or if level
motions that confuse the brain as well. Pilots need to be aware
flight is maintained, feel compelled to lean in the perceived
that fatigue or illness can exacerbate these sensations and
vertical plane until this illusion subsides.
ultimately lead to subtle incapacitation.
3-5

Coriolis Illusion
The coriolis illusion occurs when a pilot has been in a turn
long enough for the fluid in the ear canal to move at the same
speed as the canal. A movement of the head in a different
plane, such as looking at something in a different part of the
flight deck, may set the fluid moving and create the illusion
of turning or accelerating on an entirely different axis.
This action causes the pilot to think the aircraft is doing a
maneuver that it is not. The disoriented pilot may maneuver
the aircraft into a dangerous attitude in an attempt to correct
the aircraft’s perceived attitude.
For this reason, it is important that pilots develop an
instrument cross-check or scan that involves minimal
head movement. Take care when retrieving charts and
other objects in the flight deck—if something is dropped,
retrieve it with minimal head movement and be alert for
the coriolis illusion.
Graveyard Spiral
As in other illusions, a pilot in a prolonged coordinated,
constant-rate turn, will have the illusion of not turning. During
the recovery to level flight, the pilot experiences the sensation
of turning in the opposite direction. The disoriented pilot may
return the aircraft to its original turn. Because an aircraft tends
to lose altitude in turns unless the pilot compensates for the
loss in lift, the pilot may notice a loss of altitude. The absence
of any sensation of turning creates the illusion of being in a
level descent. The pilot may pull back on the controls in an
Correct path
Figure 3-7. Graveyard spiral.
3-6
attempt to climb or stop the descent. This action tightens the
spiral and increases the loss of altitude; hence, this illusion is
referred to as a graveyard spiral. [Figure 3-7] At some point,
this could lead to a loss of control by the pilot.
Somatogravic Illusion
A rapid acceleration, such as experienced during takeoff,
stimulates the otolith organs in the same way as tilting the
head backwards. This action creates the somatogravic illusion
of being in a nose-up attitude, especially in situations without
good visual references. The disoriented pilot may push the
aircraft into a nose-low or dive attitude. A rapid deceleration
by quick reduction of the throttle(s) can have the opposite
effect with the disoriented pilot pulling the aircraft into a
nose-up or stall attitude.
Inversion Illusion
An abrupt change from climb to straight-and-level flight can
stimulate the otolith organs enough to create the illusion of
tumbling backwards or inversion illusion. The disoriented
pilot may push the aircraft abruptly into a nose-low attitude,
possibly intensifying this illusion.
Elevator Illusion
An abrupt upward vertical acceleration, as can occur in
an updraft, can stimulate the otolith organs to create the
illusion of being in a climb. This is called elevator illusion.
The disoriented pilot may push the aircraft into a nose-low
Graveyard spiral
Graveyard spin

attitude. An abrupt downward vertical acceleration, usually
the brain on a constant basis. “Seat of the pants” flying is
in a downdraft, has the opposite effect with the disoriented
largely dependent upon these signals. Used in conjunction
pilot pulling the aircraft into a nose-up attitude.
with visual and vestibular clues, these sensations can be
fairly reliable. However, because of the forces acting upon
Visual Illusions
the body in certain flight situations, many false sensations
can occur due to acceleration forces overpowering gravity.
Visual illusions are especially hazardous because pilots rely
[Figure 3-8] These situations include uncoordinated turns,
on their eyes for correct information. Two illusions that lead
climbing turns, and turbulence.
to spatial disorientation, false horizon and autokinesis, are
concerned with only the visual system.
Demonstration of Spatial Disorientation
False Horizon
There are a number of controlled aircraft maneuvers a pilot
A sloping cloud formation, an obscured horizon, an aurora
can perform to experiment with spatial disorientation. While
borealis, a dark scene spread with ground lights and stars,
each maneuver normally creates a specific illusion, any false
and certain geometric patterns of ground lights can provide
sensation is an effective demonstration of disorientation. Thus,
inaccurate visual information, or false horizon, for aligning
even if there is no sensation during any of these maneuvers,
the aircraft correctly with the actual horizon. The disoriented
the absence of sensation is still an effective demonstration
pilot may place the aircraft in a dangerous attitude.
in that it shows the inability to detect bank or roll. There are
several objectives in demonstrating these various maneuvers.
Autokinesis
1.
They teach pilots to understand the susceptibility of
In the dark, a stationary light will appear to move about when
the human system to spatial disorientation.
stared at for many seconds. The disoriented pilot could lose
2.
They demonstrate that judgments of aircraft attitude
control of the aircraft in attempting to align it with the false
based on bodily sensations are frequently false.
movements of this light called autokinesis.
3.
They help lessen the occurrence and degree of
Postural Considerations
disorientation through a better understanding of the
relationship between aircraft motion, head movements,
The postural system sends signals from the skin, joints, and
and resulting disorientation.
muscles to the brain that are interpreted in relation to the
4.
They help instill a greater confidence in relying on
Earth’s gravitational pull. These signals determine posture.
flight instruments for assessing true aircraft attitude.
Inputs from each movement update the body’s position to
Level
Coordinated turn
Pull out
Level skid
Forward slip
Uncoordinated turn
Skid, slip, and uncoordinated turns feel alike.
Pilots feel they are being forced sideways in their seat.
Figure 3-8. Sensations from centrifugal force.
3-7

A pilot should not attempt any of these maneuvers at
low altitudes or in the absence of an instructor pilot or an
appropriate safety pilot.
Climbing While Accelerating
With the pilot’s eyes closed, the instructor pilot maintains
approach airspeed in a straight-and-level attitude for several
seconds, and then accelerates while maintaining straight-
and-level attitude. The usual illusion during this maneuver,
without visual references, is that the aircraft is climbing.
Climbing While Turning
With the pilot’s eyes still closed and the aircraft in a straight-
and-level attitude, the instructor pilot now executes, with a
relatively slow entry, a well-coordinated turn of about 1.5
positive G (approximately 50° bank) for 90°. While in the
turn, without outside visual references and under the effect of
the slight positive G, the usual illusion produced is that of a
climb. Upon sensing the climb, the pilot should immediately
open the eyes and see that a slowly established, coordinated
turn produces the same feeling as a climb.
Diving While Turning
Repeating the previous procedure, with the exception that
the pilot’s eyes should be kept closed until recovery from
the turn is approximately one-half completed can create this
sensation. With the eyes closed, the usual illusion is that the
aircraft is diving.
Tilting to Right or Left
While in a straight-and-level attitude, with the pilot’s eyes
closed, the instructor pilot executes a moderate or slight
skid to the left with wings level. This creates the illusion of
the body being tilted to the right. The same illusion can be
sensed with a skid to the right with wings level, except the
body feels it is being tilted to the left.
Reversal of Motion
This illusion can be demonstrated in any of the three planes of
motion. While straight and level, with the pilot’s eyes closed,
the instructor pilot smoothly and positively rolls the aircraft
to approximately a 45° bank attitude. This creates the illusion
of a strong sense of rotation in the opposite direction. After
this illusion is noted, the pilot should open his or her eyes
and observe that the aircraft is in a banked attitude.
Diving or Rolling Beyond the Vertical Plane
This maneuver may produce extreme disorientation. While
in straight-and-level flight, the pilot should sit normally,
either with eyes closed or gaze lowered to the floor. The
instructor pilot starts a positive, coordinated roll toward a
30° or 40° angle of bank. As this is in progress, the pilot
tilts his or her head forward, looks to the right or left, then
3-8
immediately returns his or her head to an upright position.
The instructor pilot should time the maneuver so the roll is
stopped as the pilot returns his or her head upright. An intense
disorientation is usually produced by this maneuver, and the
pilot experiences the sensation of falling downward into the
direction of the roll.
In the descriptions of these maneuvers, the instructor pilot is
doing the flying, but having the pilot do the flying can also
be a very effective demonstration. The pilot should close his
or her eyes and tilt their head to one side. The instructor pilot
tells the pilot what control inputs to perform. The pilot then
attempts to establish the correct attitude or control input with
eyes closed and head tilted. While it is clear the pilot has no
idea of the actual attitude, he or she will react to what the
senses are saying. After a short time, the pilot will become
disoriented, and the instructor pilot then tells the pilot to
look up and recover. The benefit of this exercise is the pilot
experiences the disorientation while flying the aircraft.
Coping with Spatial Disorientation
To prevent illusions and their potentially disastrous
consequences, pilots can:
1.
Understand the causes of these illusions and remain
constantly alert for them. Take the opportunity to
understand and then experience spatial disorientation
illusions in a device, such as a Barany chair, a
Vertigon, or a Virtual Reality Spatial Disorientation
Demonstrator.
2.
Always obtain and understand preflight weather
briefings.
3.
Before flying in marginal visibility (less than 3 miles)
or where a visible horizon is not evident such as flight
over open water during the night, obtain training and
maintain proficiency in airplane control by reference
to instruments.
4.
Do not continue flight into adverse weather conditions
or into dusk or darkness unless proficient in the use of
flight instruments. If intending to fly at night, maintain
night-flight currency and proficiency. Include cross-
country and local operations at various airfields.
5.
Ensure that when outside visual references are used,
they are reliable, fixed points on the Earth’s surface.
6.
Avoid sudden head movement, particularly during
takeoffs, turns, and approaches to landing.
7.
Be physically tuned for flight into reduced visibility.
Ensure proper rest, adequate diet, and, if flying at
night, allow for night adaptation. Remember that
illness, medication, alcohol, fatigue, sleep loss, and

mild hypoxia are likely to increase susceptibility to
spatial disorientation.
8.
Most importantly, become proficient in the use of
flight instruments and rely upon them. Trust the
instruments and disregard your sensory perceptions.
The sensations that lead to illusions during instrument
flight conditions are normal perceptions experienced by
pilots. These undesirable sensations cannot be completely
prevented, but through training and awareness, pilots can
ignore or suppress them by developing absolute reliance
on the flight instruments. As pilots gain proficiency in
instrument flying, they become less susceptible to these
illusions and their effects.
Optical Illusions
Of the senses, vision is the most important for safe
flight. However, various terrain features and atmospheric
conditions can create optical illusions. These illusions
are primarily associated with landing. Since pilots
must transition from reliance on instruments to visual
cues outside the flight deck for landing at the end of an
instrument approach, it is imperative they be aware of the
potential problems associated with these illusions and take
appropriate corrective action. The major illusions leading
to landing errors are described below.
Runway Width Illusion
A narrower-than-usual runway can create an illusion the
aircraft is at a higher altitude than it actually is, especially
when runway length-to-width relationships are comparable.
[Figure 3-9A] The pilot who does not recognize this illusion
will fly a lower approach with the risk of striking objects
along the approach path or landing short. A wider-than-usual
runway can have the opposite effect with the risk of leveling
out high and landing hard or overshooting the runway.
Runway and Terrain Slopes Illusion
An upsloping runway, upsloping terrain, or both can create
an illusion the aircraft is at a higher altitude than it actually
is. [Figure 3-9B] The pilot who does not recognize this
illusion will fly a lower approach. Downsloping runways and
downsloping approach terrain can have the opposite effect.
Featureless Terrain Illusion
An absence of surrounding ground features, as in an
overwater approach, over darkened areas, or terrain made
featureless by snow, can create an illusion the aircraft is at
a higher altitude than it actually is. This illusion, sometimes
referred to as the “black hole approach,” causes pilots to fly
a lower approach than is desired.
Water Refraction
Rain on the windscreen can create an illusion of being at a
higher altitude due to the horizon appearing lower than it is.
This can result in the pilot flying a lower approach.
Haze
Atmospheric haze can create an illusion of being at a greater
distance and height from the runway. As a result, the pilot
has a tendency to be low on the approach. Conversely,
extremely clear air (clear bright conditions of a high attitude
airport) can give the pilot the illusion of being closer than
he or she actually is, resulting in a high approach that may
cause an overshoot or go around. The diffusion of light due
to water particles on the windshield can adversely affect
depth perception. The lights and terrain features normally
used to gauge height during landing become less effective
for the pilot.
Fog
Flying into fog can create an illusion of pitching up. Pilots
who do not recognize this illusion often steepen the approach
quite abruptly.
Ground Lighting Illusions
Lights along a straight path, such as a road or lights on
moving trains, can be mistaken for runway and approach
lights. Bright runway and approach lighting systems,
especially where few lights illuminate the surrounding
terrain, may create the illusion of less distance to the
runway. The pilot who does not recognize this illusion will
often fly a higher approach.
How To Prevent Landing Errors Due to
Optical Illusions
To prevent these illusions and their potentially hazardous
consequences, pilots can:
1.
Anticipate the possibility of visual illusions during
approaches to unfamiliar airports, particularly at night
or in adverse weather conditions. Consult airport
diagrams and the Airport/Facility Directory (A/FD)
for information on runway slope, terrain, and lighting.
2.
Make frequent reference to the altimeter, especially
during all approaches, day and night.
3.
If possible, conduct aerial visual inspection of
unfamiliar airports before landing.
4.
Use Visual Approach Slope Indicator (VASI) or
Precision Approach Path Indicator (PAPI) systems
for a visual reference or an electronic glideslope,
whenever they are available.
3-9

Figure 3-9A
Narrower runway
Wider runway
Runway width illusion
• A narrower-than-usual runway can
created an illusion that the aircraft
is higher than it actually is, leading
to a lower approach.
Normal Approach
Normal Approach
• A wider-than-usual runway can
create an illusion that the aircraft is
lower than it actually is, leading to
a higher approach.
Narrower runway
Wider runway
Figure 3-9B
Downsloping runway
Upsloping runway
Runway slope illusion
• A downsloping runway can create
the illusion that the aircraft is lower
than it actually is, leading to a
Normal Approach
higher approach.
Normal Approach
• An upsloping runway can create
the illusion that the aircraft is higher
than it actually is, leading to a lower
approach.
Downsloping runway
Upsloping runway
Normal approach
Approach due to illusion
Figure 3-9. Runway width and slope illusions.
5.
Utilize the visual descent point (VDP) found on many
nonprecision instrument approach procedure charts.
6.
Recognize that the chances of being involved in an
approach accident increase when some emergency or
other activity distracts from usual procedures.
7.
Maintain optimum proficiency in landing procedures.
3-10