Introduction
This chapter discusses general planning and conduct of
instrument approaches by pilots operating under Title 14 of
the Code of Federal Regulations (14 CFR) Parts 91,121, 125,
and 135. The operations specifications (OpSpecs), standard
operating procedures (SOPs), and any other FAA- approved
documents for each commercial operator are the final
authorities for individual authorizations and limitations as
they relate to instrument approaches. While coverage of
the various authorizations and approach limitations for all
operators is beyond the scope of this chapter, an attempt
is made to give examples from generic manuals where it
is appropriate.
Approaches

Approach Planning
Depending on speed of the aircraft, availability of weather
information, and the complexity of the approach procedure
or special terrain avoidance procedures for the airport
of intended landing, the in-flight planning phase of an
instrument approach can begin as far as 100-200 NM from
the destination. Some of the approach planning should
be accomplished during preflight. In general, there are
five steps that most operators incorporate into their flight
standards manuals for the in-flight planning phase of an
instrument approach:
Gathering weather information, field conditions,
and Notices to Airmen (NOTAMs) for the airport of
intended landing.
Calculation of performance data, approach speeds,
and thrust/power settings.
Flight deck navigation/communication and
automation setup.
Instrument approach procedure (IAP) review and, for
flight crews, IAP briefing.
Operational review and, for flight crews, operational
briefing.
Although often modified to suit each individual operator,
these five steps form the basic framework for the in-flight
planning phase of an instrument approach. The extent of
detail that a given operator includes in their SOPs varies
from one operator to another; some may designate which
pilot performs each of the above actions, the sequence, and
the manner in which each action is performed. Others may
leave much of the detail up to individual flight crews and
only designate which tasks should be performed prior to
commencing an approach. Flight crews of all levels, from
single-pilot to multi-crewmember Part 91 operators, can
benefit from the experience of commercial operators in
developing techniques to fly standard instrument approach
procedures (SIAPs).
Determining the suitability of a specific IAP can be a very
complex task, since there are many factors that can limit
the usability of a particular approach. There are several
questions that pilots need to answer during preflight
planning and prior to commencing an approach. Is the
approach procedure authorized for the company, if Part
91, subpart K, 121, 125, or 135? Is the weather appropriate
for the approach? Is the aircraft currently at a weight that
will allow it the necessary performance for the approach
and landing or go around/ missed approach? Is the aircraft
properly equipped for the approach? Is the flight crew
qualified and current for the approach? Many of these types
of issues must be considered during preflight planning and
within the framework of each specific air carrier’s OpSpecs,
or Part 91.
Weather Considerations
Weather conditions at the field of intended landing dictate
whether flight crews need to plan for an instrument
approach and, in many cases, determine which approaches
can be used, or if an approach can even be attempted. The
gathering of weather information should be one of the first
steps taken during the approach-planning phase. Although
there are many possible types of weather information,
the primary concerns for approach decision-making are
windspeed, wind direction, ceiling, visibility, altimeter
setting, temperature, and field conditions. It is also a good
idea to check NOTAMs at this time, in case there were any
changes since preflight planning.
Windspeed and direction are factors because they often
limit the type of approach that can be flown at a specific
location. This typically is not a factor at airports with
multiple precision approaches, but at airports with only a
few or one approach procedure, the wrong combination
of wind and visibility can make all instrument approaches
at an airport unavailable. Pilots must be prepared to
execute other available approaches, not just the one that
they may have planned for. As an example, consider the
available approaches at the Chippewa Valley Regional
Airport (KEAU) in Eau Claire, Wisconsin. [Figure 4-1] In the
event that the visibility is reported as less than one mile,
the only useable approaches for Category C aircraft is the
Instrument Landing System (ILS) and Lateral navigation
(LNAV)/vertical navigation (VNAV) to Runway 22. This
leaves very few options for flight crews if the wind does not
favor Runway 22; and, in cases where the wind restricts a
landing on that runway altogether, even a circling approach
cannot be flown because of the visibility.
Weather Sources
Most of the weather information that flight crews receive
is issued to them prior to the start of each flight segment,
but the weather used for in-flight planning and execution
of an instrument approach is normally obtained en route
via government sources, company frequency, or Aircraft
Communications Addressing and Reporting System
(ACARS).
Air carriers and operators certificated under the provisions
of Part 119 (Certification: Air Carriers and Commercial
Operators) are required to use the aeronautical weather
information systems defined in the OpSpecs issued to that
certificate holder by the FAA. These systems may use basic
FAA/National Weather Service (NWS) weather services,
contractor or operator-proprietary weather services, and/

Figure 4-1. Chippewa Regional Airport (KEAU), Eau Claire, Wisconsin.

or Enhanced Weather Information System (EWINS) when
approved in the OpSpecs. As an integral part of EWINS
approval, the procedures for collecting, producing, and
disseminating aeronautical weather information, as well
as the crewmember and dispatcher training to support
the use of system weather products, must be accepted or
approved.
Operators not certificated under the provisions of 14
CFR Part 119 are encouraged to use FAA/NWS products
through the Flight Service Stations (FSS). FSS provide pilot
weather briefings, en route weather, receive and process
instrument flight rule (IFR) and visual flight rule (VFR) flight
plans, relay air traffic control (ATC) clearances, and issue
NOTAMs. They also provide assistance to lost aircraft and
aircraft in emergency situations and conduct VFR search
and rescue services.
Direct User Access Terminal System (DUATS), funded by the
FAA, allows any pilot to access weather information and file
a flight plan via computer. Two contract vendors currently
provide information services within the DUATS system,
and can be accessed via the Internet at www.duats.com
or www.1800wxbrief.com. The current vendors of DUATS
II service and the associated phone numbers are listed in
Chapter 7 of the Aeronautical Information Manual (AIM).
Flight Information Service—Broadcast (FIS-B) provides
certain aviation weather and other aeronautical information
to aircraft equipped with an appropriate flight deck display.
Reception of FIS-B services can be expected within a
ground station coverage volume when line-of-sight
geometry is maintained between the aircraft and ground
station. National Airspace System (NAS) wide service
availability was targeted for 2013 and is currently available
within certain regions. FIS-B provides the following textual
and graphical aviation weather and aeronautical products
free-of-charge. A detailed description of these products
can be found in the AIM.
Aviation Digital Data Services (ADDS) provides the
aviation community with text, digital and graphical
forecasts, analyses, and observations of aviation
related weather variables. ADDS is a joint effort of
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s
(NOAA) Earth System Research Laboratory, National
Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR) Research
Applications Laboratory (RAL), and the Aviation
Weather Center (AWC).
Hazardous In-flight Weather Advisory Service
(HIWAS) is a national program for broadcasting
hazardous weather information continuously over
selected navigation aids (NAVAIDs). The broadcasts
include advisories such as Airman’s Meteorological
Information (AIRMETs), Significant Meteorological
Information (SIGMETs), convective SIGMETs, and
urgent pilot weather reports (PIREPs/UUA). These
broadcasts are only a summary of the information,
and pilots should contact an FSS for detailed
information.
Telephone Information Briefing Service (TIBS)
is a service prepared and disseminated by
Flight Service. It provides continuous telephone
recordings of meteorological and aeronautical
information. Specifically, TIBS provides area and
route briefings, as well as airspace procedures and
special announcements, if applicable. It is designed
to be a preliminary briefing tool and is not intended
to replace a standard briefing from a flight service
specialist. The TIBS service is available 24 hours a day
and is updated when conditions change, but it can
only be accessed by a touch tone phone. The phone
numbers for the TIBS service are listed in the Chart
Supplement, formerly the Airport/Facility Directory
(A/FD). TIBS should also contain, but is not limited to:
surface observations, terminal aerodrome forecast
(TAFs), and winds/temperatures aloft forecasts.
The suite of available aviation weather product types
is expanding with the development of new sensor
systems, algorithms, and forecast models. The FAA and
NWS, supported by the NCAR and the NOAA Forecast
Systems Laboratory (FSL), develop and implement new
aviation weather product types through a comprehensive
process known as the Aviation Weather Technology
Transfer process. This process ensures that user needs
and technical and operational readiness requirements are
met as experimental product types mature to operational
application.
The development of enhanced communications
capabilities, most notably the internet, has allowed pilots
access to an increasing range of weather service providers
and proprietary products. It is not the intent of the FAA to
limit operator use of this weather information. However,
pilots and operators should be aware that weather services
provided by entities other than the FAA, NWS, or their
contractors (such as the DUATS and flight information
services data link (FISDL) providers) may not meet FAA/
NWS quality control standards.
Broadcast Weather
The most common method used by flight crews to obtain
specific in-flight weather information is to use a source that
broadcasts weather for the specific airport. Information
about ceilings, visibility, wind, temperature, barometric

pressure, and field conditions can be obtained from most
types of broadcast weather services. Broadcast weather
can be transmitted to the aircraft in radio voice format or
digital format, if it is available, via an ACARS system.
Automated Terminal Information Service (ATIS)
Automatic terminal information service (ATIS) is the
continuous broadcast of recorded non-control information
in selected high activity terminal areas. Its purpose is to
improve controller effectiveness and to relieve frequency
congestion by automating the repetitive transmission
of essential but routine information. The information is
continuously broadcast over a discrete very high frequency
(VHF) radio frequency or the voice portion of a local NAVAID.
ATIS transmissions on a discrete VHF radio frequency are
engineered to be receivable to a maximum of 60 NM from
the ATIS site and a maximum altitude of 25,000 feet above
ground level (AGL). At most locations, ATIS signals may be
received on the surface of the airport, but local conditions
may limit the maximum ATIS reception distance and/or
altitude. Pilots are urged to cooperate in the ATIS program
as it relieves frequency congestion on approach control,
ground control, and local control frequencies. The CS
indicates airports for which ATIS is provided.
ATIS information includes the time of the latest weather
sequence, ceiling, visibility, obstructions to visibility,
temperature, dew point (if available), wind direction
(magnetic), velocity, altimeter, other pertinent remarks,
instrument approach and runway in use. The ceiling/sky
condition, visibility, and obstructions to vision may be
omitted from the ATIS broadcast if the ceiling is above
5,000 feet and the visibility is more than five miles. The
departure runway will only be given if different from the
landing runway except at locations having a separate ATIS
for departure. The broadcast may include the appropriate
frequency and instructions for VFR arrivals to make initial
contact with approach control. Pilots of aircraft arriving or
departing the terminal area can receive the continuous
ATIS broadcast at times when flight deck duties are least
pressing and listen to as many repeats as desired. ATIS
broadcast will be updated upon the receipt of any official
hourly and special weather. A new recording will also be
made when there is a change in other pertinent data, such
as runway change and instrument approach in use.
Automated Weather Observing Programs
Automated weather reporting systems are increasingly
being installed at airports. These systems consist of
various sensors, a processor, a computer-generated voice
subsystem, and a transmitter to broadcast local, minute­
by-minute weather data directly to the pilot.
Automated Weather Observing System
The automated weather observing system (AWOS)
observations include the prefix “AUTO” to indicate that
the data are derived from an automated system. Some
AWOS locations are augmented by certified observers who
provide weather and obstruction to vision information in
the remarks of the report when the reported visibility is
less than seven miles. These sites, along with the hours of
augmentation, are published in the CS. Augmentation
is identified in the observation as “OBSERVER WEATHER.”
The AWOS wind speed, direction and gusts, temperature,
dew point, and altimeter setting are exactly the same as
for manual observations. The AWOS also reports density
altitude when it exceeds the field elevation by more than
1,000 feet. The reported visibility is derived from a sensor
near the touchdown of the primary instrument runway.
The visibility sensor output is converted to a visibility value
using a 10-minute harmonic average. The reported sky
condition/ ceiling is derived from the ceilometer located
next to the visibility sensor. The AWOS algorithm integrates
the last 30 minutes of ceilometer data to derive cloud layers
and heights. This output may also differ from the observer
sky condition in that the AWOS is totally dependent upon
the cloud advection over the sensor site.
Automated Surface Observing System (ASOS)/
Automated Weather Sensor System (AWSS)
The automated surface observing system (ASOS)/
automated weather sensor system (AWSS) is the primary
surface weather observing system of the United States. The
program to install and operate these systems throughout
the United States is a joint effort of the NWS, the FAA, and
the Department of Defense (DOD). AWSS is a follow-on
program that provides identical data as ASOS. ASOS/AWSS
is designed to support aviation operations and weather
forecast activities. The ASOS/ AWSS provides continuous
minute-by-minute observations and performs the basic
observing functions necessary to generate a aviation
routine weather report (METAR) and other aviation weather
information. The information may be transmitted over a
discrete VHF radio frequency or the voice portion of a local
NAVAID. ASOS/AWSS transmissions on a discrete VHF radio
frequency are engineered to be receivable to a maximum of
25 NM from the ASOS/AWSS site and a maximum altitude
of 10,000 feet AGL.
At many locations, ASOS/AWSS signals may be received
on the surface of the airport, but local conditions may
limit the maximum reception distance and/or altitude.
While the automated system and the human may differ
in their methods of data collection and interpretation,
both produce an observation quite similar in form and

content. For the objective elements, such as pressure,
ambient temperature, dew point temperature, wind, and
precipitation accumulation, both the automated system
and the observer use a fixed location and time-averaging
technique. The quantitative differences between the
observer and the automated observation of these elements
are negligible. For the subjective elements; however,
observers use a fixed time (spatial averaging technique) to
describe the visual elements (sky condition, visibility, and
present weather, etc.), while the automated systems use
a fixed location and time averaging technique. Although
this is a fundamental change, the manual and automated
techniques yield remarkably similar results within the limits
of their respective capabilities.
The use of the aforementioned visibility reports and
weather services are not limited for Part 91 operators.
Part 121 and 135 operators are bound by their individual
OpSpecs documents and are required to use weather
reports that come from the NWS or other approved
sources. While all OpSpecs are individually tailored, most
operators are required to use ATIS information, runway
visual range (RVR) reports, and selected reports from
automated weather stations. All reports coming from an
AWOS-3 station are usable for Part 121 and 135 operators.
Each type of automated station has different levels of
approval as outlined in individual OpSpecs. Ceiling and
visibility reports given by the tower with the departure
information are always considered official weather, and
RVR reports are typically the controlling visibility reference.
Refer to Chapter 1, Departures, of this manual, as well as
the AIM section 7-1-12 for further description of automated
weather systems.
Center Weather Advisories (CWA)
Center weather advisories (CWAs) are unscheduled inflight,
flow control, air traffic, and aircrew advisories. By nature of
its short lead time, the CWA is not a flight planning product.
It is generally a nowcast for conditions beginning in the
next two hours. CWAs will be issued:
1. As a supplement to an existing SIGMET, convective
SIGMET, or AIRMET.
2. When an in-flight advisory has not been issued
but observed or expected weather conditions
meet SIGMET/AIRMET criteria based on current
pilot reports and reinforced by other sources
of information about existing meteorological
conditions.
3. When observed or developing weather conditions
do not meet SIGMET, convective SIGMET, or
AIRMET criteria (e.g., in terms of intensity or area
coverage), but current pilot reports or other
weather information sources indicate that existing
or anticipated meteorological phenomena will
adversely affect the safe and efficient flow of air
traffic within the ARTCC area of responsibility.
Weather Regulatory Requirements
There are many practical reasons for reviewing weather
information prior to initiating an instrument approach.
Pilots must familiarize themselves with the condition of
individual airports and runways so that they may make
informed decisions regarding fuel management, diversions,
and alternate planning. Because this information is critical,
14 CFR requires pilots to comply with specific weather
minimums for planning and execution of instrument flights
and approaches..
Weather Requirements and Part 91 Operators
According to 14 CFR Part 91, § 91.103, the pilot in command
(PIC) must become familiar with all available information
concerning a flight prior to departure. Included in this
directive is the fundamental basis for pilots to review
NOTAMs and pertinent weather reports and forecasts
for the intended route of flight. This review should
include current weather reports and terminal forecasts
for all intended points of landing and alternate airports.
In addition, a thorough review of an airport’s current
weather conditions should always be conducted prior
to initiating an instrument approach. Pilots should also
consider weather information as a planning tool for fuel
management.
For flight planning purposes, weather information must be
reviewed in order to determine the necessity and suitability
of alternate airports. For Part 91 operations, the 600-2 and
800-2 rule applies to airports with precision and non-
precision approaches, respectively. Approaches with
vertical guidance (APV) are non-precision approaches
because they do not meet the International Civil Aviation
Organization (ICAO) Annex 10 standards for a precision
approach. (See Final Approach Segment section later in this
chapter for more information regarding APV approaches.)
Exceptions to the 600-2 and 800-2 alternate minimums are
listed in the front of the Aeronautical Information Services
in the Terminal Procedures Publication (TPP) and are
indicated by a symbol A
on the approach charts for the
airport. This does not preclude flight crews from initiating
instrument approaches at alternate airports when the
weather conditions are below these minimums. The 600­
2 and 800-2 rules, or any exceptions, only apply to flight
planning purposes, while published landing minimums
apply to the actual approach at the alternate.

Weather Requirements and Part 135 Operators
Unlike Part 91 operators, Part 135 operators may not depart
for a destination unless the forecast weather there will
allow an instrument approach and landing. According to
14 CFR Part 135, § 135.219, flight crews and dispatchers
may only designate an airport as a destination if the latest
weather reports or forecasts, or any combination of them,
indicate that the weather conditions will be at or above IFR
landing minimums at the estimated time of arrival (ETA).
This ensures that Part 135 flight crews consider weather
forecasts when determining the suitability of destinations.
Departures for airports can be made when the forecast
weather shows the airport will be at or above IFR minimums
at the ETA, even if current conditions indicate the airport to
be below minimums. Conversely, 14 CFR Part 135, § 135.219
prevents departures when the first airport of intended
landing is currently above IFR landing minimums, but the
forecast weather is below those minimums at the ETA.
Another very important difference between Part 91
and Part 135 operations is the Part 135 requirement for
airports of intended landing to meet specific weather
criteria once the flight has been initiated. For Part 135,
not only is the weather required to be forecast at or
above instrument flight rules (IFR) landing minimums for
planning a departure, but it also must be above minimums
for initiation of an instrument approach and, once the
approach is initiated, to begin the final approach segment
of an approach. 14 CFR Part 135, § 135.225 states that pilots
may not begin an instrument approach unless the latest
weather report indicates that the weather conditions are
at or above the authorized IFR landing minimums for that
procedure. 14 CFR Part 135, § 135.225 provides relief from
this rule if the aircraft has already passed the final approach
fix (FAF) when the weather report is received. It should be
noted that the controlling factor for determining whether
or not the aircraft can proceed is reported visibility. RVR, if
available, is the controlling visibility report for determining
that the requirements of this section are met. The runway
visibility value (RVV), reported in statute miles (SM), takes
precedent over prevailing visibility. There is no required
timeframe for receiving current weather prior to initiating
the approach.
Weather Requirements and Part 121 Operators
Like Part 135 operators, flight crews and dispatchers
operating under Part 121 must ensure that the appropriate
weather reports or forecasts, or any combination thereof,
indicate that the weather will be at or above the authorized
minimums at the ETA at the airport to which the flight is
dispatched (14 CFR Part 121, § 121.613). This regulation
attempts to ensure that flight crews will always be able to
execute an instrument approach at the destination airport.
Of course, weather forecasts are occasionally inaccurate;
therefore, a thorough review of current weather is required
prior to conducting an approach. Like Part 135 operators,
Part 121 operators are restricted from proceeding past the
FAF of an instrument approach unless the appropriate IFR
landing minimums exist for the procedure. In addition,
descent below the minimum descent altitude (MDA),
decision altitude (DA), or decision height (DH) is governed,
with one exception, by the same rules that apply to Part 91
operators. The exception is that during Part 121 and 135
operations, the airplane is also required to land within the
touchdown zone (TDZ). Refer to the section titled Minimum
Descent Altitude, Decision Altitude, and Decision Height
later in this chapter for more information regarding MDA,
DA, and DH.
Aircraft Performance Considerations
All operators are required to comply with specific airplane
performance limitations that govern approach and landing.
Many of these requirements must be considered prior to the
origination of flight. The primary goal of these performance
considerations is to ensure that the aircraft can remain clear
of obstructions throughout the approach, landing, and go-
around phase of flight, as well as land within the distance
required by the FAA. Although the majority of in-depth
performance planning for an instrument flight is normally
done prior to the aircraft’s departure, a general review of
performance considerations is usually conducted prior to
commencing an instrument approach.
Aircraft Performance Operating Limitations
Generally speaking, air carriers must have in place an
approved method of complying with Subpart I of 14
CFR Parts 121 and 135 (Airplane Performance Operating
Limitations), thereby proving the airplane’s performance
capability for every flight that it intends to make. Flight
crews must have an approved method of complying
with the approach and landing performance criteria in
the applicable regulations prior to departing for their
intended destination. The primary source of information for
performance calculations for all operators, including Part
91, is the approved Aircraft Flight Manual (AFM) or Pilot’s
Operating Handbook (POH) for the make and model of
aircraft that is being operated. It is required to contain the
manufacturer determined performance capabilities of the
aircraft at each weight, altitude, and ambient temperature
that are within the airplane’s listed limitations. Typically, the
AFM for a large turbine powered aircraft should contain
information that allows flight crews to determine that the
aircraft will be capable of performing the following actions,
considering the landing weight and other pertinent
environmental factor:

Land within the distance required by the regulations.
Climb from the missed approach point (MAP) and
maintain a specified climb gradient with one engine
inoperative.
Perform a go-around from the final stage of landing
and maintain a specified climb gradient with all
engines operating and the aircraft in the landing
configuration.
Many airplanes have more than one allowable flap
configuration for normal landing. Often, a reduced flap
setting for landing allows the airplane to operate at a higher
landing weight into a field that has restrictive obstacles in
the missed approach or rejected landing climb path. On
these occasions, the full-flap landing speed may not allow
the airplane enough energy to successfully complete a
go-around and avoid any high terrain and/or obstacles
that might exist on the climb out. Therefore, all-engine
and engine-out missed approaches, as well as rejected
landings, must be taken into consideration in compliance
with the regulations.
Aircraft Approach Categories
Aircraft approach category means a grouping of aircraft
based on a reference landing speed (VREF), if specified, or
if VREF is not specified, 1.3 VSO at the maximum certified
landing weight. VREF, VSO, and the maximum certified
landing weight are those values as established for the
aircraft by the certification authority of the country of
registry. A pilot must use the minima corresponding to
the category determined during certification or higher.
Helicopters may use Category A minima. If it is necessary
to operate at a speed in excess of the upper limit of the
speed range for an aircraft’s category, the minimums for
the higher category must be used. For example, an airplane
that fits into Category B, but is circling to land at a speed of
145 knots, must use the approach Category D minimums.
As an additional example, a Category A aircraft that is
operating at 130 knots on a straight-in approach must use
the approach Category C minimums. See the following
category limits noting that the airspeeds depicted are
indicated airspeeds (IAS):
Category A: Speed less than 91 knots.
Category B: Speed 91 knots or more but less than
121 knots.
Category C: Speed 121 knots or more but less than
141 knots.
Category D: Speed 141 knots or more but less than
166 knots.
Category E: Speed 166 knots or more.
Note: Helicopter pilots may use the Category A line of
minimums provided the helicopter is operated at Category
A airspeeds.
An airplane is certified in only one approach category, and
although a faster approach may require higher category
minimums to be used, an airplane cannot be flown to the
minimums of a slower approach category. The certified
approach category is permanent and independent of the
changing conditions of day-to-day operations. From a
TERPS viewpoint, the importance of a pilot not operating
an aircraft at a category line of minimums lower than the
aircraft is certified for is primarily the margin of protection
provided for containment of the aircraft within the
procedure design for a slower aircraft. This includes height
loss at the decision altitude, missed approach climb surface,
and turn containment in the missed approach at the higher
category speeds.
Pilots are responsible for determining if a higher approach
category applies. If a faster approach speed is used that
places the aircraft in a higher approach category, the
minimums for the appropriate higher category must be
used. Emergency returns at weights in excess of maximum
certificated landing weight, approaches made with
inoperative flaps, and approaches made in icing conditions
for some airplanes are examples of situations that can
necessitate the use of higher approach category minima.
Circling approaches are one of the most challenging
flight maneuvers conducted in the NAS, especially for
pilots of CAT C and CAT D turbine-powered, transport
category airplanes. These maneuvers are conducted at
low altitude, day and night, and often with precipitation
present affecting visibility, depth perception, and the ability
to adequately assess the descent profile to the landing
runway. Most often, circling approaches are conducted to
runways without the benefit of electronic navigation aids to
support the descent from the Circling Minimums Decision
Altitude (CMDA) to the runway.
Circling approaches conducted at faster-than-normal,
straight-in approach speeds also require a pilot to
consider the larger circling approach area, since published
circling minimums provide obstacle clearance only
within the appropriate area of protection and is based
on the approach category speed. [Figure 4-2] The circling
approach area is the obstacle clearance area for aircraft
maneuvering to land on a runway that does not meet the
criteria for a straight- in approach. The size of the circling
area varies with the approach category of the aircraft, as
shown in Figure 4-2.

A
B
C
D
E
Approach category
Radius (miles)
RADII (r) defining size of areas, vary
with the approach category
Circling
approach area
r
r
r
r
r
Figure 4-2. Construction of circling approach area.
A minimum of 300 feet of obstacle clearance is provided
in the circling segment. Pilots should remain at or above
the circling altitude until the aircraft is continuously in a
position from which a descent to a landing on the intended
runway can be made at a normal rate of descent and using
normal maneuvers. Since an approach category can make
a difference in the approach and weather minimums and,
in some cases, prohibit flight crews from initiating an
approach, the approach speed should be calculated and
the effects on the approach determined and briefed in
the preflight planning phase, as well as reviewed prior to
commencing an approach.
Prior to FAA Order 8260.3 Change 21, pilots were often
faced with the challenge of descending using a stabilized
approach concept if the CMDA height above airport
(HAA) exceeded 1,200 feet. Once the HAA approached
1,200 feet, pilots were often forced to increase their rates
of descent in order to arrive at the appropriate “in-slot”
position. “In-slot” being defined as at a minimum, a CAT C
or CAT D turbine-powered airplane should be wings level
on a three degree - 318 ft/NM descent path not less than 1
NM from the touchdown point (1,000 feet beyond runway
threshold). This was due to the small size of the circling
protected airspace that the aircrews must remain within
to ensure obstacle clearance.
The FAA Order 8260.3 Change 21 to the circling protected
airspace afforded much greater obstacle protection.
However, it also afforded the pilot the opportunity to
use the extra protected airspace to mitigate the need to
conduct a high descent rate, unstabilized approach that
was often necessary as a result of the previous criteria for
the Circling Approach Radius (CAR). For example, under
FAA Order 8260.3 Change 21, a sea level airport with
a 1,500 ft HAA will have CAT C CAR of 2.86 NM, a 1.16
NM (68.5%) increase over pre-Change 21 CAR for CAT C.
This extra protected airspace can be used by the pilot to
maneuver the aircraft instead of being forced to use high
descent rates which are often necessary for high HAA
circling approaches.
Most commercial operators dictate standard procedures for
conducting instrument approaches in their FAA-approved
manuals. These standards designate company callouts,
flight profiles, configurations, and other specific duties
for each flight deck crewmember during the conduct of
an instrument approach.
Instrument Approach Charts
Beginning in February 2000, the FAA began issuing the
current format for instrument approach charts. This chart
was developed by the Department of Transportation
(DOT), Volpe National Transportation Systems Center and
is commonly referred to as the Pilot Briefing Information
format. The FAA chart format is presented in a logical order,
facilitating pilot briefing of the procedures. [Figure 4-3]
Approach Chart Naming Conventions
Individual FAA charts are identified on both the top and
bottom of the page by their procedure name (based on the
NAVAIDs required for the final approach), runway served,
and airport location. The identifier for the airport is also
listed immediately after the airport name. [Figure 4-4]
There are several types of approach procedures that may
cause some confusion for flight crews unfamiliar with the
naming conventions. Although specific information about
each type of approach is covered later in this chapter, listed
below are a few procedure names that can cause confusion.
Straight-In Procedures
When two or more straight-in approaches with the same
type of guidance exist for a runway, a letter suffix is added
to the title of the approach so that it can be more easily
identified. These approach charts start with the letter Z
and continue in reverse alphabetical order. For example,
consider the (RNAV) (GPS) Z RWY 13C and RNAV (RNP) Y
RWY 13C approaches at Chicago Midway International
Airport. [Figure 4-5] Although these two approaches can
be flown with a global positioning system (GPS) to the

Figure 4-3. Instrument approach chart.

NOT FOR NAVIGATION
Figure 4-4. Procedure identification.
same runway, they are significantly different (e.g., one is
a Required Navigation Performance (RNP) Authorization
Required (AR) formally known as SPECIAL AIRCRAFT &
AIRCREW AUTHORIZATION REQUIRED (SAAAR);” one has
circling minimums and the other does not; the minimums
are different; and the missed approaches are not the same).
The approach procedure labeled Z has lower landing
minimums than Y (some older charts may not reflect this).
In this example, the LNAV MDA for the RNAV (GPS) Z RWY
13C has the lowest minimums of either approach due to
the differences in the final approach required obstacle
clearance (ROC) evaluation. This convention also eliminates
any confusion with approach procedures labeled A and
B, where only circling minimums are published. The
designation of two area navigation (RNAV) procedures
to the same runway can occur when it is desirable to
accommodate panel mounted GPS receivers and flight
management systems (FMSs), both with and without
vertical navigation (VNAV). It is also important to note that
only one of each type of approach for a runway, including
ILS, VHF omnidirectional range (VOR), and non-directional
beacon (NDB) can be coded into a database.
Circling-Only Procedures
Approaches that do not have straight-in landing minimums
are identified by the type of approach followed by a letter.
Examples in Figure 4-6 show four procedure titles at the
same airport that have only circling minimums.
As can be seen from the example, the first approach of
this type created at the airport is labeled with the letter A,
and the lettering continues in alphabetical order. Typically,
circling only approaches are designed for one of the
following reasons:
The final approach course alignment with the
runway centerline exceeds 30°.
The descent gradient is greater than 400 ft/NM from
the FAF to the threshold crossing height (TCH). When
this maximum gradient is exceeded, the circling
only approach procedure may be designed to meet
the gradient criteria limits. This does not preclude a
straight-in landing if a normal descent and landing
can be made in accordance with the applicable CFRs.
A runway is not clearly defined on the airfield.
Communications
The communication strip provided near the top of FAA
approach charts gives flight crews the frequencies that
they can expect to be assigned during the approach.
The frequencies are listed in the logical order of use from
arrival to touchdown. Having this information immediately
available during the approach reduces the chances of a
loss of contact between ATC and flight crews during this
critical phase of flight.
It is important for flight crews to understand their
responsibilities with regard to communications in the
various approach environments. There are numerous
differences in communication responsibilities when
operating into and out of airports without ATC towers
as compared to airports with control towers. Today’s
pilots face an increasing range of ATC environments and
conflicting traffic dangers, making approach briefing and
preplanning more critical. Individual company operating
manuals and SOPs dictate the duties for each crewmember.
FAA AC 120-71, Standard Operating Procedures for Flight
Deck Crewmembers, contains the following concerning
ATC communications: SOPs should state who (Pilot Flying
(PF), Pilot Monitoring (PM), Flight Engineer (FE/SO)) handles
the radios for each phase of flight, as follows:
PF makes input to aircraft/autopilot and/or verbally
states clearances while PM confirms input is what he
or she read back to ATC.
Any confusion in the flight deck is immediately
cleared up by requesting ATC confirmation.
If any crewmember is off the flight deck, all ATC
instructions are briefed upon his or her return. Or,

NOT FOR NAVIGATION
EC-3, 18 NOV 2010 to 16 DEC 2010
EC-3, 18 NOV 2010 to 16 DEC 2010
EC-3, 18 NOV 2010 to 16 DEC 2010
EC-3, 18 NOV 2010 to 16 DEC 2010
Figure 4-5. Multiple approaches.

NOT FOR NAVIGATION
NW-1,
NW-1, 18 NOV 2010 to 16
V 2010 to 16 DEC 2010
Figure 4-6. Procedures with circling landing minima.
if any crewmember is off the flight deck, all ATC
instructions are written down until his or her return
and then passed to that crewmember upon return.
Similarly, if a crewmember is off ATC frequency when
making a precision approach (PA) announcement
or when talking on company frequency, all ATC
instructions are briefed upon his or her return.
Company policy should address use of speakers,
headsets, boom microphone, and/or hand-held
microphone.
SOPs should state the altitude awareness company
policy on confirming assigned altitude.
Example: The PM acknowledges ATC altitude clearance. If
the aircraft is on the autopilot, then the PF makes input into
the autopilot/altitude alerter. PF points to the input while
stating the assigned altitude as he or she understands it.
The PM then points to the input stating aloud what he or
she understands the ATC clearance to be confirming that
the input and clearance match. If the aircraft is being hand-
flown, then the PM makes the input into the altitude alerter/
autopilot, then points to the input and states clearance.
PF then points to the alerter stating aloud what he or she
understands the ATC clearance to be confirming that the
alerter and clearance match.
Example: If there is no altitude alerter in the aircraft, then
both pilots write down the clearance, confirm that they
have the same altitude, and then cross off the previously
assigned altitude.
Approach Control
Approach control is responsible for controlling all
instrument flights operating within its area of responsibility.
Approach control may serve one or more airports. Control
is exercised primarily through direct pilot and controller
communication and airport surveillance radar (ASR). Prior
to arriving at the initial approach fix (IAF), instructions will
be received from the air route traffic control center (ARTCC)
to contact approach control on a specified frequency.
Where radar is approved for approach control service, it is
used not only for radar approaches, but also for vectors in
conjunction with published non-radar approaches using
conventional NAVAIDs or RNAV/GPS.
When radar handoffs are initiated between the ARTCC
and approach control, or between two approach control
facilities, aircraft are cleared (with vertical separation) to
an outer fix most appropriate to the route being flown
and, if required, given holding instructions. Or, aircraft
are cleared to the airport or to a fix so located that the
handoff is completed prior to the time the aircraft reaches
the fix. When radar handoffs are used, successive arriving
flights may be handed off to approach control with radar
separation in lieu of vertical separation.
After release to approach control, aircraft are vectored
to the final approach course. ATC occasionally vectors
the aircraft across the final approach course for spacing
requirements. The pilot is not expected to turn inbound
on the final approach course unless an approach clearance
has been issued. This clearance is normally issued with the
final vector for interception of the final approach course,
and the vector enables the pilot to establish the aircraft on
the final approach course prior to reaching the FAF.
Air Route Traffic Control Center (ARTCC)
ARTCCs are approved for and may provide approach
control services to specific airports. The radar systems used
by these centers do not provide the same precision as an
ASR or precision approach radar (PAR) used by approach
control facilities and control towers, and the update rate
is not as fast. Therefore, pilots may be requested to report
established on the final approach course. Whether aircraft
are vectored to the appropriate final approach course or
provide their own navigation on published routes to it,
radar service is automatically terminated when the landing
is completed; or when instructed to change to advisory
frequency at airports without an operating ATC tower,
whichever occurs first. When arriving on an IFR flight plan
at an airport with an operating control tower, the flight
plan is closed automatically upon landing.
The extent of services provided by approach control varies
greatly from location to location. The majority of Part 121
operations in the NAS use airports that have radar service
and approach control facilities to assist in the safe arrival
and departure of large numbers of aircraft. Many airports
do not have approach control facilities. It is important for
pilots to understand the differences between approaches
with and without an approach control facility. For example,

Figure 4-7. Durango approach and low altitude en route excerpt.
consider the Durango, Colorado, ILS DME RWY 2 and low
altitude en route chart excerpt shown in Figure 4-7.
High or Lack of Minimum Vectoring Altitudes
(MVAs)
Considering the fact that most modern commercial and
corporate aircraft are capable of direct, point-to-point flight,
it is increasingly important for pilots to understand the
limitations of ARTCC capabilities with regard to minimum
altitudes. There are many airports that are below the
coverage area of Center radar, and; therefore, off-route
transitions into the approach environment may require
that the aircraft be flown at a higher altitude than would
be required for an on-route transition. In the Durango
example, an airplane approaching from the northeast on
a direct route to the Durango VOR may be restricted to
a minimum IFR altitude (MIA) of 17,000 feet MSL due to
unavailability of Center radar coverage in that area at lower
altitudes. An arrival on V95 from the northeast would be
able to descend to a minimum en route altitude (MEA) of
12,000 feet, allowing a shallower transition to the approach

environment. An off-route arrival may necessitate a descent
into holding in order to avoid an unstable approach to
Durango.
Lack of Approach Control Terrain Advisories
Flight crews must understand that terrain clearance cannot
be assured by ATC when aircraft are operating at altitudes
that are not served by Center or approach radar. Recent
National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) investigations
have identified several accidents that involved controlled
flight into terrain (CFIT) by IFR rated and VFR pilots
operating under visual flight conditions at night in remote
areas. In many of these cases, the pilots were in contact with
ATC at the time of the accident and receiving radar service.
The pilots and controllers involved all appear to have been
unaware that the aircraft were in danger. Increased altitude
awareness and better preflight planning would likely have
prevented all of these accidents. How can pilots avoid
becoming involved in a CFIT accident?
CFIT accidents are best avoided through proper preflight
planning.
Terrain familiarization is critical to safe visual
operations at night. Use sectional charts or other
topographic references to ensure that your altitude
safely clears terrain and obstructions all along your
route.
In remote areas, especially in overcast or moonless
conditions, be aware that darkness may render visual
avoidance of high terrain nearly impossible and that
the absence of ground lights may result in loss of
horizon reference.
When planning a nighttime VFR flight, follow IFR
practices, such as climbing on a known safe course,
until well above surrounding terrain. Choose a
cruising altitude that provides terrain separation
similar to IFR flights (2,000 feet AGL in mountainous
areas and 1,000 feet above the ground in other areas.)
When receiving radar services, do not depend on ATC
to warn you of terrain hazards. Although controllers
try to warn pilots if they notice a hazardous situation,
they may not always be able to recognize that a
particular VFR aircraft is dangerously close to terrain.
When issued a heading along with an instruction to
“maintain VFR,” be aware that the heading may not
provide adequate terrain clearance. If you have any
doubt about your ability to visually avoid terrain and
obstacles, advise ATC immediately and take action to
reach a safe altitude if necessary.
ATC radar software can provide limited prediction and
warning of terrain hazards, but the warning system
is configured to protect IFR flights and is normally
suppressed for VFR aircraft. Controllers can activate
the warning system for VFR flights upon pilot request,
but it may produce numerous false alarms for aircraft
operating below the MIA, especially in en route center
airspace.
If you fly at night, especially in remote or unlit areas,
consider whether a GPS-based terrain awareness unit
would improve your safety of flight.
Lack of approach control traffic advisories—if radar
service is not available for the approach, the ability
of ATC to give flight crews accurate traffic advisories
is greatly diminished. In some cases, the common
traffic advisory frequency (CTAF) may be the only tool
available to enhance an IFR flight’s awareness of traffic
at the destination airport. Additionally, ATC will not
clear an IFR flight for an approach until the preceding
aircraft on the approach has cancelled IFR, either on
the ground, or airborne once in visual meteorological
conditions (VMC).
Airports With an ATC Tower
Control towers are responsible for the safe, orderly, and
expeditious flow of all traffic that is landing, taking off,
operating on and in the vicinity of an airport and, when
the responsibility has been delegated, towers also provide
for the separation of IFR aircraft in terminal areas. Aircraft
that are departing IFR are integrated into the departure
sequence by the tower. Prior to takeoff, the tower controller
coordinates with departure control to assure adequate
aircraft spacing.
Airports Without A Control Tower
From a communications standpoint, executing an
instrument approach to an airport that is not served by an
ATC tower requires more attention and care than making
a visual approach to that airport. Pilots are expected to
self-announce their arrival into the vicinity of the airport
no later than 10 NM from the field. Depending on the
weather, as well as the amount and type of conflicting
traffic that exists in the area, an approach to an airport
without an operating ATC tower increases the difficulty of
the transition to visual flight.
In many cases, a flight arriving via an instrument approach
needs to mix in with VFR traffic operating in the vicinity
of the field. For this reason, many companies require that
flight crews make contact with the arrival airport CTAF or
company operations personnel via a secondary radio over
25 NM from the field in order to receive traffic advisories.
In addition, pilots should attempt to listen to the CTAF
well in advance of their arrival in order to determine the
VFR traffic situation.

NOT FOR NAVIGATION
Since separation cannot be provided by ATC between
IFR and VFR traffic when operating in areas where there
is no radar coverage, pilots are expected to make radio
announcements on the CTAF. These announcements
allow other aircraft operating in the vicinity to plan their
departures and arrivals with a minimum of conflicts.
In addition, it is very important for crews to maintain a
listening watch on the CTAF to increase their awareness
of the current traffic situation. Flights inbound on an
instrument approach to a field without a control tower
should make several self-announced radio calls during
the approach:
Initial call within 4-10 minutes of the aircraft’s arrival
at the IAF. This call should give the aircraft’s location
as well as the crew’s approach intentions.
Departing the IAF, stating the approach that is being
initiated.
Procedure turn (or equivalent) inbound.
FAF inbound, stating intended landing runway and
maneuvering direction if circling.
Short final, giving traffic on the surface notification
of imminent landing.
When operating on an IFR flight plan at an airport without
a functioning control tower, pilots must initiate cancellation
of the IFR flight plan with ATC or an AFSS. Remote
communications outlets (RCOs) or ground communications
outlets (GCOs), if available, can be used to contact an ARTCC
or an AFSS after landing. If a frequency is not available on
NW-1, 18 NOV 2010 to 16 DEC 2010
NW-1, 18 NOV 2010 to 16 DEC 2010
Figure 4-8. Cheyenne Regional (KCYS), Cheyenne, Wyoming, ILS or LOC RWY 27.

the ground, the pilot has the option to cancel IFR while
in flight if VFR conditions can be maintained while in
contact with ARTCC, as long as those conditions can be
maintained until landing. Additionally, pilots can relay a
message through another aircraft or contact flight service
via telephone.
Primary NAVAID
Most conventional approach procedures are built around
a primary final approach NAVAID; others, such as RNAV
(GPS) approaches, are not. If a primary NAVAID exists for
an approach, it should be included in the IAP briefing, set
into the appropriate backup or active navigation radio, and
positively identified at some point prior to being used for
course guidance. Adequate thought should be given to the
appropriate transition point for changing from FMS or other
en route navigation over to the conventional navigation to
be used on the approach. Specific company standards and
procedures normally dictate when this changeover occurs;
some carriers are authorized to use FMS course guidance
throughout the approach, provided that an indication
of the conventional navigation guidance is available
and displayed. Many carriers, or specific carrier fleets,
are required to change over from RNAV to conventional
navigation prior to the FAF of an instrument approach.
Depending on the complexity of the approach procedure,
pilots may have to brief the transition from an initial NAVAID
to the primary and missed approach NAVAIDs. Figure 4-8
shows the Cheyenne, Wyoming, ILS Runway 27 approach
procedure, which requires additional consideration during
an IAP briefing.
If the 15 DME arc of the CYS VOR is to be used as the
transition to this ILS approach procedure, caution must
be paid to the transition from en route navigation to the
initial NAVAID and then to the primary NAVAID for the ILS
approach. Planning when the transition to each of these
NAVAIDs occurs may prevent the use of the incorrect
NAVAID for course guidance during approaches where
high pilot workloads already exist.
Equipment Requirements
The navigation equipment that is required to join and fly an
IAP is indicated by the title of the procedure and notes on
the chart. Straight-in IAPs are identified by the navigation
system by providing the final approach guidance and the
runway with which the approach is aligned (for example,
VOR RWY 13). Circling-only approaches are identified
by the navigation system by providing final approach
guidance and a letter (for example, VOR A). More than one
navigation system separated by a slant indicates that more
than one type of equipment must be used to execute the
final approach (for example, VOR/DME RWY 31). More than
one navigation system separated by the word“or”indicates
either type of equipment can be used to execute the final
approach (for example, VOR or GPS RWY 15).
In some cases, other types of navigation systems,
including radar, are required to execute other portions of
the approach or to navigate to the IAF (for example, an
NDB procedure turn to an ILS, or an NDB in the missed
approach, or radar required to join the procedure or identify
a fix). When ATC radar or other equipment is required for
procedure entry from the en route environment, a note is
charted in the plan view of the approach procedure chart
(for example, RADAR REQUIRED or AUTOMATIC DIRECTION
FINDER (ADF) REQUIRED). When radar or other equipment
is required on portions of the procedure outside the final
approach segment, including the missed approach, a note
is charted in the notes box of the pilot briefing portion
of the approach chart (for example, RADAR REQUIRED or
DISTANCE MEASURING EQUIPMENT (DME) REQUIRED).
Notes are not charted when VOR is required outside the
final approach segment. Pilots should ensure that the
aircraft is equipped with the required NAVAIDs to execute
the approach, including the missed approach. Refer to the
AIM paragraph 5-4-5 for additional options with regards to
equipment requirements for IAPs.
RNAV systems may be used as a Substitute Means of
Navigation when a very high frequency (VHF) Omni-
directional Range (VOR), Distance Measuring Equipment
(DME), Tactical Air Navigation (TACAN), VOR/TACAN
(VORTAC), VOR/DME, non-directional radio beacon (NDB),
or compass locator facility including locator outer marker
and locator middle marker is out-of-service, i.e., the
Navigation Aid (NAVAID) information is not available; an
aircraft is not equipped with an automatic direction finder
(ADF) or DME; or the installed ADF or DME on an aircraft is
not operational. For example, if equipped with a suitable
RNAV system, a pilot may hold over an out-of-service NDB.
Refer to Advisory Circular 90-108, Use of Suitable RNAV
System on Conventional Routes and Procedures, dated
March 3, 2011 for additional guidance on the proper times
and procedures for substituting a RNAV system for means
of navigation.
Courses
Traditional Courses
An aircraft that has been cleared to a holding fix and
subsequently “cleared…approach,” normally does not
receive new routing. Even though clearance for the
approach may have been issued prior to the aircraft
reaching the holding fix, ATC would expect the pilot to

proceed via the holding fix that was the last assigned route,
and the feeder route associated with that fix, if a feeder
route is published on the approach chart, to the IAF to
commence the approach. When cleared for the approach,
the published off-airway (feeder) routes that lead from
the en route structure to the IAF are part of the approach
clearance.
If a feeder route to an IAF begins at a fix located along
the route of flight prior to reaching the holding fix,
and clearance for an approach is issued, a pilot should
commence the approach via the published feeder route.
For example, the aircraft would not be expected to overfly
the feeder route and return to it. The pilot is expected to
commence the approach in a similar manner at the IAF,
if the IAF for the procedure is located along the route of
flight to the holding fix.
If a route of flight directly to the IAF is desired, it should
be so stated by the controller with phraseology to include
the words “direct,” “proceed direct,” or a similar phrase
that the pilot can interpret without question. When a
pilot is uncertain of the clearance, ATC should be queried
immediately as to what route of flight is preferred.
The name of an instrument approach, as published, is
used to identify the approach, even if a component of the
approach aid is inoperative or unreliable. The controller
will use the name of the approach as published, but must
advise the aircraft at the time an approach clearance is
issued that the inoperative or unreliable approach aid
component is unusable. (Example: “Cleared ILS RWY 4,
glideslope unusable.”)
Area Navigation Courses
RNAV (GPS) approach procedures introduce their own
tracking issues because they are flown using an onboard
navigation database. They may be flown as coupled
approaches or flown manually. In either case, navigation
system coding is based on procedure design, including
waypoint (WP) sequencing for an approach and missed
approach. The procedure design indicates whether the WP
is a fly-over (FO) or fly-by (FB), and provides appropriate
guidance for each. A FB WP requires the use of turn
anticipation to avoid overshooting the next flight segment.
A FO WP precludes any turn until the WP is over flown and
is followed by either an intercept maneuver of the next
flight segment or direct flight to the next WP.
Figure 4-9. Fly-by and fly-over waypoints.

Approach waypoints, except for the missed approach
waypoint (MAWP) and the missed approach holding
waypoint (MAHWP), are normally FB WPs. Notice that in the
plan view in Figure 4-9, there are four FB WPs, but only the
circled WP symbol at PRINO is a FO WP. If flying manually to
a selected RNAV WP, pilots should anticipate the turn at a FB
WP to ensure a smooth transition and avoid overshooting
the next flight segment. Alternatively, for a FO WP, no turn
is accomplished until the aircraft passes the WP.
There are circumstances when a WP may be coded into the
database as both a FB WP and a FO WP, depending on how
the WPs are sequenced during the approach procedure. For
example, a WP that serves as an IAF may be coded as a FB
WP for the approach and as a FO WP when it also serves
as the MAWP for the missed approach procedure (MAP).
This is just one reason why instrument approaches should
be loaded in their entirety from the FMS and not manually
built or modified.
Altitudes
Prescribed altitudes may be depicted in four different
configurations: minimum, maximum, recommended, and
mandatory. The U.S. Government distributes approach
charts produced by the FAA. Altitudes are depicted on
these charts in the profile view with an underscore or
overscore, or both to identify them as minimum, maximum,
or mandatory, respectively.
Minimum altitudes are depicted with the altitude value
underscored. Aircraft are required to maintain altitude
at or above the depicted value (e.g., 3000).
Maximum altitudes are depicted with the altitude value
overscored. Aircraft are required to maintain altitude
at or below the depicted value (e.g., 4800).
Mandatory altitudes are depicted with the altitude value
both underscored and overscored. Aircraft are required
to maintain altitude at the depicted value (e.g., 5500).
Recommended altitudes are depicted without an
underscore or overscore.
Note: Pilots are cautioned to adhere to altitudes as
prescribed because, in certain instances, they may be used
as the basis for vertical separation of aircraft by ATC. If a
depicted altitude is specified in the ATC clearance, that
altitude becomes mandatory as defined above.
Minimum Safe/Sector Altitude
Minimum Safe Altitudes are published for emergency use
on IAP charts. MSAs provide 1,000 feet of clearance over
all obstacles but do not necessarily assure acceptable
navigation signal coverage. The MSA depiction on the plan
view of an approach chart contains the identifier of the
center point of the MSA, the applicable radius of the MSA,
a depiction of the sector(s), and the minimum altitudes
above mean sea level which provide obstacle clearance.
For conventional navigation systems, the MSA is normally
based on the primary omnidirectional facility on which the
IAP is predicated, but may be based on the airport reference
point (ARP) if no suitable facility is available. For RNAV
approaches, the MSA is based on an RNAV waypoint. MSAs
normally have a 25 NM radius; however, for conventional
navigation systems, this radius may be expanded to 30 NM
if necessary to encompass the airport landing surfaces.
Depicted on the Plan View of approach charts, a single
sector altitude is normally established. However when it is
necessary to obtain obstacle clearance, an MSA area may
be further divided with up to four sectors.
Final Approach Fix Altitude
Another important altitude that should be briefed during
an IAP briefing is the FAF altitude, designated by the cross
on a non-precision approach, and the lightning bolt symbol
designating the glideslope/glidepath intercept altitude on
a precision approach. Adherence and cross-check of this
altitude can have a direct effect on the success and safety
of an approach.
Proper airspeed, altitude, and configuration, when crossing
the FAF of a non-precision approach, are extremely
important no matter what type of aircraft is being flown.
The stabilized approach concept, implemented by the
FAA within the SOPs of each air carrier, suggests that
crossing the FAF at the published altitude is often a critical
component of a successful non-precision approach,
especially in a large turbojet aircraft.
The glideslope intercept altitude of a precision approach
should also be included in the IAP briefing. Awareness of
this altitude when intercepting the glideslope can ensure
the flight crew that a “false glideslope” or other erroneous
indication is not inadvertently followed. Many air carriers
include a standard callout when the aircraft passes over the
FAF of the non-precision approach underlying the ILS. The
PM states the name of the fix and the charted glideslope
altitude, thus allowing both pilots to cross-check their
respective altimeters and verify the correct indications.
Minimum Descent Altitude (MDA), Decision
Altitude (DA), And Decision Height (DH)
MDA—the lowest altitude, expressed in feet MSL, to which
descent is authorized on final approach or during circle-to­
land maneuvering in execution of a standard instrument
approach procedure (SIAP) where no electronic glideslope
is provided.

DA—a specified altitude in the precision approach at
which a missed approach must be initiated if the required
visual reference to continue the approach has not been
established.
DH—with respect to the operation of aircraft, means the
height at which a decision must be made during an ILS, MLS,
or PAR IAP to either continue the approach or to execute a
missed approach.
CAT II and III approach DHs are referenced to AGL and
measured with a radio altimeter.
The height above touchdown (HAT) for a CAT I precision
approach is normally 200 feet above touchdown zone
elevation (TDZE). When a HAT of 250 feet or higher is
published, it may be the result of the signal-in-space
coverage, or there may be penetrations of either the final
or missed approach obstacle clearance surfaces (OCSs).
If there are OCS penetrations, the pilot has no indication
on the approach chart where the obstacles are located. It
is important for pilots to brief the MDA, DA, or DH so that
there is no ambiguity as to what minimums are being used.
These altitudes can be restricted by many factors. Approach
category, inoperative equipment in the aircraft or on the
ground, crew qualifications, and company authorizations
are all examples of issues that may limit or change the
height of a published MDA, DA, or DH.
For many air carriers, OpSpecs may be the limiting factor
for some types of approaches. NDB and circling approaches
are two common examples where the OpSpecs minimum
listed altitudes may be more restrictive than the published
minimums. Many Part 121 and 135 operators are restricted
from conducting circling approaches below 1,000 feet
MDA and 3 SM visibility by Part C of their OpSpecs,
and many have specific visibility criteria listed for NDB
approaches that exceed visibilities published for the
approach (commonly 2 SM). In these cases, flight crews
must determine which is the more restrictive of the two
and comply with those minimums.
In some cases, flight crew qualifications can be the limiting
factor for the MDA, DA, or DH for an instrument approach.
There are many CAT II and III approach procedures
authorized at airports throughout the United States, but
RNP AR restricts their use to pilots who have received
specific training, and aircraft that are equipped and
authorized to conduct those approaches. Other rules
pertaining to flight crew qualifications can also determine
the lowest usable MDA, DA, or DH for a specific approach.
14 CFR Part 121, § 121.652, 14 CFR Part 125, § 125.379,
and 14 CFR Part 135, § 135.225 require that some PICs,
with limited experience in the aircraft they are operating,
increase the approach minimums and visibility by 100
feet and one-half mile respectively. Rules for these “high­
minimums” pilots are usually derived from a combination
of federal regulations and the company’s OpSpecs. There
are many factors that can determine the actual minimums
that can be used for a specific approach. All of them must
be considered by pilots during the preflight and approach
planning phases, discussed, and briefed appropriately.
Pilots are cautioned to fully understand and abide by the
guidelines set forth in 14 CFR § 91.175(c) regarding proper
identification of the runway and runway environment when
electing to continue any approach beyond the published
DA/DH or MDA.
It is imperative to recognize that any delay in making a
decision to execute the Missed Approach Procedure at
the DA/DH or MDA/Missed Approach Point will put the
aircrew at risk of impacting any obstructions that may be
penetrating the visual obstacle clearance surface
The visual segment of an IAP begins at DA or MDA and
continues to the runway. There are two means of operating
in the visual segment, one is by using natural vision under
14 CFR Part 91, § 91.175 (c) and the other is by using an
Enhanced Flight Vision System under 14 CFR Part 91, §
91.176.
Figure 4-10A. View during an approach with EFVS (left) and
without EFVS (right). (Images courtesy of NASA Langley
Research Center)
Enhanced Flight Vision Systems (EFVS) and
Instrument Approaches [Figure 4-10A]
An Enhanced Flight Vision System (EFVS) is an installed
aircraft system which uses a head up display (HUD), or an
equivalent display that is a head up presentation, to combine
aircraft flight information and flight symbology, navigation
guidance, and a real-time image of the external scene to
the pilot on a single display. Imaging sensors, which may
be based on forward-looking infrared (FLIR), millimeter
wave radiometry, millimeter wave radar, low-level light
intensification, or other real-time imaging technologies,
produce a real-time image of the outside scene. Combining

the flight information, navigation guidance, and sensor
imagery on a HUD or equivalent display allows the pilot to
continue looking forward along the flightpath throughout
the entire approach, landing, and rollout.
Sections 91.175(c) and 91.176 specify two means of operating
visually below DA/DH or MDA in the visual segment of an
IAP. One means is by using natural vision under § 91.175(c),
and the other is by using enhanced vision provided by an
EFVS under § 91.176. When the runway environment cannot
be visually acquired using natural vision, a pilot may use an
EFVS to continue descending below DA/DH or MDA under §
91.176. An EFVS operation is an operation in which visibility
conditions require an EFVS to be used in lieu of natural vision
to perform an approach or landing, determine enhanced
flight visibility, identify required visual references, or conduct
a rollout. There are two types of EFVS operations – EFVS
operations to touchdown and rollout and EFVS operations
to 100 feet above the touchdown zone elevation (TDZE). An
EFVS operation to touchdown and rollout is an operation in
which a pilot uses the enhanced vision imagery provided by
an EFVS in lieu of natural vision to descend below DA or DH to
touchdown and rollout [Figure 4-10B]. These operations may
be conducted on standard instrument approach procedures
(SIAPs) or special instrument approach procedures (IAPs) that
have a DA or DH (e.g., Precision or APV approach).
Figure 4-10B. EFVS Operation to Touchdown and Rollout.
An EFVS operation to 100 feet above the TDZE is an
operation in which the pilot uses the EFVS in lieu of natural
vision to descend below DA/DH or MDA down to 100 feet
above the TDZE [Figure 4-10C]. To descend below 100 feet
above the TDZE, however, natural vision must be used. EFVS
operations to 100 feet above the TDZE may be conducted
on SIAPs or special IAPs that have a DA/DH or MDA.
While the regulations do not prohibit EFVS from being used
during any phase of flight for situational awareness, EFVS
displays are not designed, installed, certified, or intended
as a sufficient visual system to conduct circling maneuvers.
EFVS may only be used during a circle-to-land maneuver
provided the visual references required throughout the
circling maneuver are distinctly visible to the pilot using
natural vision throughout the circling maneuver. Therefore,
an EFVS cannot be used to satisfy the requirement that an
identifiable part of the airport be distinctly visible to the
pilot during a circling maneuver at or above MDA or while
descending below MDA from a circling maneuver.
The visual information provided by an EFVS serves as
independent verification of the position information
provided by the aircraft’s displays and systems. An EFVS
also enables a pilot to assess the enhanced flight visibility
and identify required visual references, helps a pilot align
the aircraft with the runway, and provides position, roll, rate
of closure, and distance remaining information. Sections
91.176(a) and 91.176(b) permit a pilot to use an EFVS to
identify the required visual references and to determine
that the enhanced flight visibility provided by the EFVS is
not less than the visibility prescribed in the IAP to be flown.
Both the visual reference and enhanced flight visibility
requirements of the regulations must be met before the
pilot can descend below DA/DH during an EFVS operation
to touchdown and rollout or below DA/DH or MDA during
an EFVS operation to 100 feet above the TDZE. The aircraft
also must continuously be in a position from which a
descent to landing can be made on the intended runway at
a normal rate of descent using normal maneuvers. For EFVS
operations to touchdown, § 91.176(a)(2)(vi) requires that
the descent rate must allow touchdown to occur within the
touchdown zone of the runway of intended landing for all
operations. Section 91.176(b)(2)(v), operations conducted
to 100 feet above the TDZE, requires the descent rate to
allow touchdown to occur within the touchdown zone of
the runway of intended landing for operations conducted
under 14 CFR Parts 121 and 135.
Figure 4-10C. EFVS Operations to 100 Feet Above the TDZE.
It is important to understand that using an EFVS does not
result in obtaining lower minima with respect to the visibility
or the DA/DH or MDA specified in the IAP. For example, a
pilot who is using an EFVS on a Category I ILS approach that
specifies a DA of 200 feet and a required visibility of RVR 2400
feet must comply with a 200-foot DA and an enhanced flight
visibility of 2400 feet, even though the pilot may not have
2400 feet of flight visibility using natural vision or a reported

visibility of RVR 2400 feet. The decision altitude is specified
by the IAP the pilot is flying, and it does not change whether
EFVS is used or not. Accordingly, the visibility specified in
the IAP does not change. The difference is whether the pilot
assesses the RVR 2400 feet visibility prescribed by the IAP
using natural vision or whether he or she assesses it using an
EFVS. An EFVS simply provides another means of operating
in the visual segment of an IAP. That is, it gives the pilot
another means to see the required visual references when
they might not be visible using natural vision, and it gives
the pilot a means to see forward along the flightpath the
distance required by the enhanced flight visibility – when
he or she might not be able to do so using natural vision.
During an EFVS operation, a pilot must initiate a go-around
at or below DA/DH or MDA whenever the requirements
of § 91.176 are not met. The published missed approach
procedure provides obstacle clearance only when the
missed approach is initiated from or above the DA/DH, or
at the MAP. It assumes a climb rate of 200 fT/NM unless a
higher climb gradient is identified on the procedure. If a
pilot initiates a go-around at a point below DA/DH or after
the MAP, obstacle clearance is not necessarily provided by
following the published missed approach procedure. Prior
planning is recommended and should include contingencies
between the published MAP and touchdown with reference
to obstacle clearance, aircraft performance, and alternate
escape plans. Additionally, pilots should be especially
knowledgeable of the approach conditions and approach
course alignment when considering whether to rely on
EFVS during an instrument approach with an offset final
approach course. Depending upon the combination of
crosswind correction, approach course offset, and the lateral
field of view provided by a particular EFVS, the required
visual references may or may not be within the pilot’s view
looking through the EFVS upon reaching the MAP. AC
90-106 (current version) contains additional information
about visual segment obstacle clearance, missed approach
obstacle clearance, and considerations associated with offset
approaches.
Operators that have a specific approval from the FAA to
conduct special IAPs should evaluate those instrument
procedures to determine their compatibility with EFVS
operations. Special IAPs are frequently dependent on the
ability of the operator to meet certain requirements that
may include aircraft performance, equipage, airport facility
equipment, crew training, or other requirements. These
EC-2, 18 N
NOT FOR NAVIGATION
Figure 4-11A. VNAV information.

procedures also may have nonstandard features such as
nonstandard final approach course alignment, nonstandard
descent gradients, or other features that may or may not be
compatible with the conduct of EFVS operations.
Under § 91.176(a), operators who have been issued OpSpec
C073, MSpec MC073, or LOA C073, may conduct EFVS
operations to touchdown and rollout on certain vertical
navigation (VNAV) IAPs that use an MDA as a DA/DH in
accordance with C073. Additionally, §§ 91.176 and 91.189
permit an authorized EFVS operation to be conducted
during an authorized Category II or Category III operation.
Currently, EFVS operations in rotorcraft can be conducted
only on IAPs that are flown to a runway. Instrument approach
criteria, procedures, and appropriate visual references have
not yet been developed for straight-in landing operations
below DA/DH or MDA under IFR to heliports or platforms.
EFVS cannot be used in lieu of natural vision to descend
below published minimums on copter approaches to a
point-in-space (PinS) followed by a “proceed visual flight
rules (VFR)” visual segment, or on approaches designed
to a specific landing site using a “proceed visually” visual
segment.
Vertical Navigation
One of the advantages of some GPS and multi-sensor FMS
RNAV avionics is the advisory VNAV capability. Traditionally,
the only way to get vertical path information during an
approach was to use a ground-based precision NAVAID.
Modern RNAV avionics can display an electronic vertical
path that provides a constant-rate descent to minimums.
Since these systems are advisory and not primary guidance,
the pilot must continuously ensure the aircraft remains at
or above any published altitude constraint, including step­
down fix altitudes, using the primary barometric altimeter.
The pilots, aircraft, and operator must be approved to use
advisory VNAV inside the FAF on an instrument approach.
VNAV information appears on selected conventional
nonprecision, GPS, and RNAV approaches (see “Types of
Approaches” later in this chapter). It normally consists of
two fixes (the FAF and the landing runway threshold), a
FAF crossing altitude, a vertical descent angle (VDA), and
may provide a visual descent point (VDP) [Figure 4-11A].
The VDA provides the pilot with advisory information
not previously available on nonprecision approaches. It
provides a means for the pilot to establish a stabilized
descent from the FAF or step-down fix to the MDA.
Stabilized descent is a key factor in the reduction of
controlled flight into terrain (CFIT) incidents. However,
pilots should be aware that the published angle is for
information only − it is strictly advisory in nature. There is
no implicit additional obstacle protection below the MDA.
Pilots must still respect any published stepdown fixes and
the published MDA unless the visual cues stated 14 CFR
§ 91.175 are present, and they can visually acquire and
avoid both lit and unlit obstacles once below the MDA. The
presence of a VDA does not guarantee obstacle protection
in the visual segment and does not change any of the
requirements for flying a nonprecision approach.
Pilots may use the published angle and estimated/actual
groundspeed to find a target rate of descent from the rate
of descent table published in the back of the U.S. Terminal
Procedures Publication. This rate of descent can be flown
with the Vertical Velocity Indicator (VVI) in order to use
the VDA as an aid to flying a stabilized descent. No special
equipment is required.
In rare cases, the LNAV minima may have a lower HAT
than minima with a glide path, due to the location of the
obstacles and the nonprecision MAP. This should serve as
a clear indication to the pilot that obstacles exist below
the MDA, which must be seen in order to ensure adequate
clearance. In those cases, the glide path may be treated
as a VDA and used to descend to the LNAV MDA, as long
as all of the rules for a nonprecision approach are applied
at the MDA.
When there are obstacles in the visual area that could
cause an aircraft to destabilize the approach between
the MDA and touchdown, the IAP will not show a vertical
descent angle in the profile view. The charts currently
include the following statement: “Descent Angle NA” or
“Descent Angle NA-Obstacles” [Figure 4-11B ].
Figure 4-11B. Descent Angle N/A..

Figure 4-12. RNAV GPS approach minima.

Like flying any other IAP, the pilot must see and avoid any
obstacles in the visual segment during transition to landing.
A constant-rate descent has many safety advantages over
non-precision approaches that require multiple level-offs at
stepdown fixes or manually calculating rates of descent. A
stabilized approach can be maintained from the FAF to the
landing when a constant-rate descent is used. Additionally,
the use of an electronic vertical path produced by onboard
avionics can serve to reduce CFIT, and minimize the
effects of visual illusions on approach and landing. Some
countries even mandate the use of continuous descent
final approaches (CDFAs) on non-precision approaches.
Wide Area Augmentation System
The Wide Area Augmentation System (WAAS) offers
an opportunity for airports to gain ILS like approach
capability without the purchase or installation of any
ground-based navigation equipment at the airport.
Today, WAAS is already being used at more than 900
runways across the United States to achieve minimums
as low as 200 feet height above HAT/one-half mile
visibility.
Benefits Of WAAS In The Airport Environment
WAAS is a navigation service using a combination of GPS
satellites and the WAAS geostationary satellites to improve
the navigational service provided by GPS. WAAS achieved
initial operating capability (IOC) in 2003. The system is
owned and operated by the FAA and provided free of direct
user charges to users across the United States and most of
Canada and Mexico.
WAAS improves the navigational system accuracy for
en route, terminal, and approach operations over all the
continental United States and significant portions of Alaska,
Canada, and Mexico. This new navigational technology
supports vertically-guided instrument approaches to all
qualifying runways in the United States. Vertically-guided
approaches reduce pilot workload and provide safety
benefits compared to non-precision approaches. The WAAS
enabled vertically guided approach procedures are called
LPV, which stands for “localizer performance with vertical
guidance,”and provide ILS equivalent approach minimums
as low as 200 feet at qualifying airports. Actual minimums
are based on an airport’s current infrastructure, as well as
an evaluation of any existing obstructions. The FAA plans to
publish 300 WAAS approach procedures per year to provide
service to all qualifying instrument runways within the NAS.
Advantages Of WAAS Enabled LPV Approaches
The advantages of WAAS enabled LPV approaches include:
LPV procedures have no requirement for ground-
based transmitters at the airport.
No consideration needs to be given to the placement
of navigation facility, maintenance of clear zones
Ranging sources
Status information
GBAS reference receivers
GBAS ground facility
Omnidirectional VHF data broadcast (VDB) signal
GPS satellites
Differential corrections, integrity
data and path definition
Figure 4-13. GBAS architecture.

around the facility, or access to the facility for
maintenance.
LPV approaches eliminate the need for critical area
limitations associated with an ILS.
From a pilot’s viewpoint, an LPV approach looks
and flies like an ILS, but the WAAS approach is more
stable than that of an ILS.
WAAS equipped users can fly RNAV and basic
required navigation performance (RNP) procedures,
as well as LPV procedures, and the avionics costs
are relatively inexpensive considering the total
navigation solution provided.
RNAV (GPS) approach charts normally have four lines
of approach minimums: LPV, LNAV/VNAV, LNAV, and
Circling. Figure 4-12 shows how these minimums might
be presented on an approach chart, with the exception
of Ground Based Augmentation System (GBAS) Landing
System (GLS). This enables as many GPS equipped aircraft
to use the procedure as possible and provides operational
flexibility if WAAS becomes unavailable. Some aircraft may
only be equipped with GPS receivers so they can fly to the
LNAV MDA. Some aircraft equipped with GPS and FMS
(with approach-certified barometric vertical navigation, or
Baro-VNAV) can fly to the LNAV/VNAV MDA. Flying a WAAS
LPV approach requires an aircraft with WAAS-LPV avionics.
If for some reason the WAAS service becomes unavailable,
all GPS or WAAS equipped aircraft can revert to the LNAV
MDA and land safely using GPS only, which is available
nearly 100 percent of the time. Some locations will have
an LP line of minima on an RNAV (GPS) approach chart; but
the use of LP is being phased out. At locations with obstacle
penetrations in the missed approach segment, there might
be two lines of minima for the same type of navigation- one
line with higher approach minima without a specified climb
gradient and another line with lower approach minima with
a specified climb gradient in the event of missed approach.
LPV identifies WAAS approach with vertical guidance (APV)
approach minimums with electronic lateral and vertical
guidance capability. LPV is used for approaches constructed
with WAAS criteria where the value for the vertical alarm
limit is more than 12 meters and less than 50 meters.
WAAS avionics equipment approved for LPV approaches is
required for this type of approach. The lateral guidance is
equivalent to localizer accuracy, and the protected area is
considerably smaller than the protected area for the present
LNAV and LNAV/VNAV lateral protection. Aircraft can fly this
minima line with a statement in the AFM that the installed
equipment supports LPV approaches. In Figure 4-12, notice
the WAAS information shown in the top left corner of the
pilot briefing information on the chart depicted. Below the
term WAAS is the WAAS channel number (CH 56202), and
the WAAS approach identifier (W35A), indicating Runway
35L in this case, and then a letter to designate the first in a
series of procedures to that runway [Figure 4-12].
LNAV/VNAV identifies APV minimums developed to
accommodate an RNAV IAP with vertical guidance, usually
provided by approach certified Baro-VNAV, but with vertical
and lateral integrity limits larger than a precision approach
or LPV. Many RNAV systems that have RNP 0.3 or less
approach capability are specifically approved in the AFM.
Airplanes that are commonly approved in these types of
operations include Boeing 737NG, 767, and 777, as well as
the Airbus A300 series. Landing minimums are shown as
DAs because the approaches are flown using an electronic
glide path. Other RNAV systems require special approval. In
some cases, the visibility minimums for LNAV/VNAV might
be greater than those for LNAV only. This situation occurs
because DA on the LNAV/VNAV vertical descent path is
farther away from the runway threshold than the LNAV
MDA missed approach point.
Also shown in Figure 4-12, is the LNAV minimums line. This
minimum is for lateral navigation only, and the approach
minimum altitude is published as a MDA. LNAV provides
the same level of service as the present GPS stand alone
approaches. LNAV supports the following systems: WAAS,
when the navigation solution will not support vertical
navigation; and GPS navigation systems which are
presently authorized to conduct GPS approaches.
Circling minimums that may be used with any type of
approach approved RNAV equipment when publication of
straight-in approach minimums is not possible.
Ground-Based Augmentation System (GBAS)
The United States version of the Ground-Based
Augmentation System (GBAS) has traditionally been
referred to as the Local Area Augmentation System (LAAS).
The worldwide community has adopted GBAS as the official
term for this type of navigation system. To coincide with
international terminology, the FAA is also adopting the term
GBAS to be consistent with the international community.
GBAS is a ground-based augmentation to GPS that focuses
its service on the airport area (approximately a 20–30 mile
radius) for precision approach, DPs, and terminal area
operations. It broadcasts its correction message via a very
high frequency (VHF) radio data link from a ground-based
transmitter. GBAS yields the extremely high accuracy,
availability, and integrity necessary for Category I, II, and
III precision approachesand provides the ability for flexible,
curved approach paths. GBAS demonstrated accuracy is
less than one meter in both the horizontal and vertical
axis. [Figure 4-13]

Figure 4-14. GLS approach at Newark, New Jersey.

Figure 4-15. RNAV RNP approach procedure with curved flight tracks.

Figure 4-16. North Platte Regional (KLBF), North Platte, Nebraska, RNAV (GPS) RWY 30.

The GBAS augments the GPS to improve aircraft safety
during airport approaches and landings. It is expected
that the end state configuration will pinpoint the aircraft’s
position to within one meter or less with a significant
improvement in service flexibility and user operating costs.
GBAS is comprised of ground equipment and avionics.
The ground equipment includes four reference receivers, a
GBAS ground facility, and a VHF data broadcast transmitter.
This ground equipment is complemented by GBAS avionics
installed on the aircraft. Signals from GPS satellites are
received by the GBAS GPS reference receivers (four
receivers for each GBAS) at the GBAS equipped airport.
The reference receivers calculate their position using GPS.
The GPS reference receivers and GBAS ground facility work
together to measure errors in GPS provided position.
The GBAS ground facility produces a GBAS correction
message based on the difference between actual and GPS
calculated position. Included in this message is suitable
integrity parameters and approach path information.
This GBAS correction message is then sent to a VHF data
broadcast (VDB) transmitter. The VDB broadcasts the GBAS
signal throughout the GBAS coverage area to avionics in
GBAS equipped aircraft. GBAS provides its service to a
local area (approximately a 20–30 mile radius). The signal
coverage is designed support the aircraft’s transition from
en route airspace into and throughout the terminal area
airspace.
The GBAS equipment in the aircraft uses the corrections
provided on position, velocity, and time to guide the
aircraft safely to the runway. This signal provides ILS look
alike guidance as low as 200 feet above touchdown.
GBAS will eventually support landings all the way to the
runway surface. Figure 4-14 is an example of a GBAS (LAAS)
approach into Newark, New Jersey.
Required Navigation Performance (RNP)
The operational advantages of RNP include accuracy,
onboard performance monitoring and alerting which
provide increased navigation precision and lower
minimums than conventional RNAV. RNP DAs can be
as low as 250 feet with visibilities as low as 3/4 SM.
Besides lower minimums, the benefits of RNP include
improved obstacle clearance limits, as well as reduced
pilot workload. When RNP capable aircraft fly an accurate,
repeatable path, ATC can be confident that these aircraft
are at a specific position, thus maximizing safety and
increasing capacity.
To attain the benefits of RNP approach procedures, a key
component is curved flight tracks. Constant radius turns
around a fix are called “radius-to-fix legs (RF legs).”These
turns, which are encoded into the navigation database,
allow the aircraft to avoid critical areas of terrain or
conflicting airspace while preserving positional accuracy
by maintaining precise, positive course guidance along
the curved track. The introduction of RF legs into the
design of terminal RNAV procedures results in improved
use of airspace and allows procedures to be developed to
and from runways that are otherwise limited to traditional
linear flight paths or, in some cases, not served by an IFR
procedure at all. Navigation systems with RF capability
are a prerequisite to flying a procedure that includes an
RF leg. Refer to the notes box of the pilot briefing portion
of the approach chart in Figure 4-15.
In the United States, operators who seek to take advantage
of RNP approach procedures must meet the special
RNP requirements outlined in FAA AC 90-101, Approval
Guidance for RNP Procedures with Authorization Required
(AR). Currently, most new transport category airplanes
receive an airworthiness approval for RNP operations.
However, differences can exist in the level of precision that
each system is qualified to meet. Each individual operator
is responsible for obtaining the necessary approval and
authorization to use these instrument flight procedures
with navigation databases.
RNAV Approach Authorization
Like any other authorization given to air carriers and Part 91
operators, the authorization to use VNAV on a conventional
non-precision approach, RNAV approaches, or LNAV/VNAV
approaches is found in that operator’s OpSpecs, AFM, or
other FAA-approved documents. There are many different
levels of authorizations when it comes to the use of RNAV
approach systems. The type of equipment installed in the
aircraft, the redundancy of that equipment, its operational
status, the level of flight crew training, and the level of the
operator’s FAA authorization are all factors that can affect
a pilot’s ability to use VNAV information on an approach.
Because most Part 121, 125, 135, and 91 flight departments
include RNAV approach information in their pilot training
programs, a flight crew considering an approach to
North Platte, Nebraska, using the RNAV (GPS) RWY 30
approach shown in Figure 4-16, would already know which
minimums they were authorized to use. The company’s
OpSpecs, FOM, and the AFM for the pilot’s aircraft would
dictate the specific operational conditions and procedures
by which this type of approach could be flown.
There are several items of note that are specific to this type
of approach that should be considered and briefed. One
is the terminal arrival area (TAA) that is displayed in the

approach planview. TAAs, discussed later in this chapter,
depict the boundaries of specific arrival areas, and the
MIA for those areas. The TAAs should be included in an
IAP briefing in the same manner as any other IFR transition
altitude. It is also important to note that the altitudes listed
in the TAAs should be referenced in place of the MSAs on
the approach chart for use in emergency situations.
In addition to the obvious differences contained in the
planview of Figure 4-16, RNAV (GPS) approach procedure
example, pilots should be aware of the issues related to
Baro-VNAV and RNP . The notes section of the procedure in
the example contains restrictions relating to these topics.
RNP values for each individual leg of the procedure, defined
by the procedure design criteria for containment purposes,
are encoded into the aircraft’s navigation database.
Applicable landing minimums are shown in a normal
manner along with the associated RNP value in the landing
minimums section.
RNP required sensors, FMS capabilities, and relevant
procedure notes are included in the Pilot Briefing
Information procedure notes section. [Figure 4-15] RNP
AR requirements are highlighted in large, bold print.
RNP procedures are sequenced in the same manner as
RNAV (GPS) procedures. Procedure title “RNAV” includes
parenthetical “(RNP)” terminology. RF legs can be used in
any segment of the procedure (transition, intermediate,
final, or missed approach). RF leg turn directions (left or
right) are not noted in the planview because the graphic
depiction of the flight tracks is intuitive. Likewise, the arc
center points, arc radius, and associated RF leg performance
limits, such as bank angles and speeds are not depicted
because these aircraft performance characteristics are
encoded in the navigation database. RNP values for each
individual leg of the procedure, defined by the procedure
design criteria for containment purposes, are encoded
into the aircraft's navigation database. Applicable landing
minimums are shown in a normal manner along with the
associated RNP value in the landing minimums section.
When more than one set of RNP landing minimums is
available and an aircrew is able to achieve lower RNP
through approved means, the available (multiple) sets of
RNP minimums are listed with the lowest set shown first;
remaining sets shown in ascending order, based on the
RNP value. On this particular procedure, lateral and vertical
course guidance from the DA to the Runway Waypoint (LTP)
is provided by the aircraft’s FMS and onboard navigation
database; however, any continued flight below the DA
to the landing threshold is to be conducted under VMC.
[Figure 4-15]
Baro-VNAV
Baro-VNAV is an RNAV system function that uses barometric
altitude information from the aircraft’s altimeter to
compute and present a vertical guidance path to the pilot.
The specified vertical path is computed as a geometric
path, typically computed between two waypoints or
an angle based computation from a single waypoint.
Operational approval must also be obtained for Baro−
VNAV systems to operate to the LNAV/VNAV minimums.
Baro−VNAV may not be authorized on some approaches
due to other factors, such as no local altimeter source being
available. Baro−VNAV is not authorized on LPV procedures.
For the RNAV (GPS) RWY 30 approach, the note “DME/
DME RNP-0.3 NA” prohibits aircraft that use only DME/
DME sensors for RNAV from conducting the approach.
[Figure 4-16]
Because these procedures can be flown with an approach
approved RNP system and “RNP” is not sensor specific, it
was necessary to add this note to make it clear that those
aircraft deriving RNP 0.3 using DME/DME only are not
authorized to conduct the procedure.
The least accurate sensor authorized for RNP navigation
Figure 4-17. Example of LNAV and Circling Minima lower than LNAV/VNAV
DA. Harrisburg International RNAV (GPS) Runway 13.
Figure 4-18. Explanation of Minima.

NOT FOR NAVIGATION
NOT FOR NAVIGATION
C
EC-3, 18 NOV 2010 to 16 DEC 2010
Airport sketch
EC-3, 18 NOV 2010 to 16 DEC 2010
E
Figure 4-19. Airport sketch and diagram for Chicago O'Hare International.

is DME/DME. The necessary DME NAVAID ground
infrastructure may or may not be available at the airport of
intended landing. The procedure designer has a computer
program for determining the usability of DME based on
geometry and coverage. Where FAA flight inspection
successfully determines that the coverage and accuracy of
DME facilities support RNP, and that the DME signal meets
inspection tolerances, although there are none currently
published, the note “DME/DME RNP 0.3 Authorized” would
be charted. Where DME facility availability is a factor, the
note would read, “DME/DME RNP 0.3 Authorized; ABC and
XYZ required,”meaning that ABC and XYZ DME facilities are
required to assure RNP 0.3.
Hot and Cold Temperature Limitations
A minimum and maximum temperature limitation is
published on procedures that authorize Baro−VNAV
operation. These temperatures represent the airport
temperature above or below which Baro−VNAV is not
authorized to LNAV/VNAV minimums unless temperature
compensation can be accomplished. As an example,
the limitation will read, uncompensated Baro−VNAV NA
below −11 °C (12 °F) or above 49 °C (120 °F). [Figure 4-15]
This information will be found in the upper left hand box
of the pilot briefing. When the temperature is above the
high temperature or below the low temperature limit,
Baro−VNAV may be used to provide a stabilized descent
to the LNAV MDA; however, extra caution should be used
in the visual segment to ensure a vertical correction is not
required. If the VGSI is aligned with the published glide
path, and the aircraft instruments indicate on glide path,
an above or below glide path indication on the VGSI may
indicate that temperature error is causing deviations to
the glide path. These deviations should be considered if
the approach is continued below the MDA.
Many systems which apply Baro−VNAV temperature
compensation only correct for cold temperature. In this
case, the high temperature limitation still applies. Also,
temperature compensation may require activation by
maintenance personnel during installation in order to be
functional, even though the system has the feature. Some
systems may have a temperature correction capability,
but correct the Baro−altimeter all the time, rather than
just on the final, which would create conflicts with other
aircraft if the feature were activated. Pilots should be
aware of compensation capabilities of the system prior to
disregarding the temperature limitations. The information
can be seen in the notes section in Figure 4-16.
In response to aviation industry concerns over cold weather
altimetry errors, the FAA conducted a risk analysis to
determine if current 14 CFR Part 97 instrument approach
procedures, in the NAS place aircraft at risk during cold
temperature operations. This study applied the coldest
recorded temperature at the given airports in the last five
years and specifically determined if there was a probability
that during these non-standard day operations, anticipated
altitude errors in a barometric altimetry system could
exceed the Required Obstacle Clearance (ROC) used on
procedure segment altitudes. If a probability of the ROC
being exceeded went above one percent on a segment
of the approach, a temperature restriction was applied to
that segment. In addition to the low probability that these
procedures will be required, the probability of the ROC
being exceeded precisely at an obstacle position is
extremely low, providing an even greater safety margin.
Pilots need to make an altitude correction to the published,
“at”, “at or above” and “at or below” altitudes on designated
segment(s) of IAPs listed at specific airports, on all
published procedures and runways, when the reported
airport temperature is at or below the published airport
cold temperature restriction.
This list may also be found at the bottom of the, “Terminal
Procedures Basic Search” page found at: http://www.faa.
gov/air_traffic/flight_info/aeronav/digital_products/dtpp/
search/
Pilots without temperature compensating aircraft
are responsible to calculate and make a manual cold-
temperature altitude correction to the designated
segment(s) of the approach using the AIM 7-2-3, ICAO Cold
Temperature Error Table.
No extrapolation above the 5000 ft column required. Pilots
should use the 5000 feet “height above airport in feet”
column for calculating corrections of greater than 5000
feet above reporting station. Pilots will add correction(s)
from the table to the segment altitude(s) and fly at the
new corrected altitude. PILOTS SHOULD NOT MAKE AN
ALTIMETER CHANGE to accomplish an altitude correction.
Pilots with temperature compensating aircraft must ensure
the system is on and operating for each segment requiring
an altitude correction. Pilots must ensure they are flying
at corrected altitude. If the system is not operating, the
pilot is responsible to calculate and apply a manual cold
weather altitude correction using the AIM 7-2-3 ICAO Cold
Temperature Error Table.
Pilots must report cold temperature corrected altitudes
to Air Traffic Control (ATC) whenever applying a cold
temperature correction on an intermediate segment and/
or a published missed approach final altitude. This should

be done on initial radio contact with the ATC issuing
approach clearance. ATC requires this information in
order to ensure appropriate vertical separation between
known traffic. ATC will not beproviding a cold temperature
correction to Minimum Vectoring Altitudes (MVA). Pilots
must not apply cold temperature compensation to ATC
assigned altitudes or when flying on radar vectors in lieu
of a published missed approach procedure unless cleared
by ATC.
Pilots should query ATC when vectors to an intermediate
segment are lower than the requested intermediate
segment altitude corrected for temperature. Pilots are
encouraged to self-announce corrected altitude when
flying into uncontrolled airfields.
The following are examples of appropriate pilot-to-ATC
communication when applying cold-temperature altitude
corrections:
On initial check-in with ATC providing approach clearance:
Hayden, CO (example below).
Intermediate segment: “Require 10600 ft. for cold
temperature operations until BEEAR”,
Missed Approach segment: “Require final holding altitude,
10600 ft. on missed approach for cold temperature
operations”
Pilots cleared by ATC for an instrument approach
procedure; “Cleared the RNAV RWY 28 approach (from any
IAF)”. Hayden, CO (example below).
Intermediate Segment: “Level 10600 ft for cold temperature
operations inside HIPNA to BEEAR”
Pilots are not required to advise ATC if correcting on the
final segment only. Pilots must use the corrected MDA or
DA/DH as the minimum for an approach. Pilots must meet
the requirements in 14 CFR Part 91.175 in order to operate
below the corrected MDA or DA/DH. Pilots must see and
avoid obstacles when descending below the MDA.
The temperature restriction at a “Cold Temperature
Restricted Airport” is mutually exclusive from the charted
temperature restriction published for “uncompensated
baro-VNAV systems” on 14 CFR Part 97 RNAV (GPS) and
RNAV (RNP) approach charts. The charted temperature
restriction for uncompensated baro-VNAV systems is
applicable to the final segment LNAV/VNAV minima.
The charted temperature restriction must be followed
regardless of the cold temperature restricted airport
temperature.
Pilots are not required to calculate a cold temperature
altitude correction at any airport with a runway length of
2,500 feet or greater that is not included in the airports list
found at the URL above. Pilots operating into an airport
with a runway length less than 2,500 feet, may make a
cold temperature altitude correction in cold temperature
conditions.
Cold Temperature Restricted Airports: These airports are
listed in the FAA Notices To Airmen Publication (NTAP)
found here: https://www.faa.gov/air_traffic/publications/
notices/.
Airports are listed by ICAO code, Airport Name, Temperature
Restriction in Celsius/Fahrenheit and affected Segment.
One temperature may apply to multiple segments.
Italicized airports have two affected segments, each
with a different temperature restrictions. The warmest
temperature will be indicated on Airport IAPs next to a
snowflake symbol,
in the United States Terminal
Procedure Publication. The ICON will be added to the TPPs
incrementally each charting cycle.
LNAV, LNAV/VNAV and Circling Minimums
There are some RNAV procedures with lower non-precision
LNAV minimums [Figure 4-17] than vertically-guided
LNAV/VNAV minimums. Circling procedures found on
the same approach chart may also have lower minimums
than the vertically-guided LNAV/VNAV procedure. Each
RNAV procedure is evaluated independently and different
approach segments have differing required obstacle
clearance (ROC) values, obstacle evaluation area (OEA)
dimensions and final segment types. Figure 4-18 explains
the differences.
Airport/Runway Information
Another important piece of a thorough approach briefing
is the discussion of the airport and runway environment.
A detailed examination of the runway length (this must
include the A/FD section of the CS for the landing distance
available), the intended turnoff taxiway, and the route of
taxi to the parking area, are all important briefing items.
In addition, runway conditions should be discussed. The
effect on the aircraft’s performance must be considered if
the runway is contaminated.
FAA approach charts include a runway sketch on each
approach chart to make important airport information
easily accessible to pilots. In addition, at airports that have
complex runway/taxiway configurations, a separate full-
page airport diagram is published.
The airport diagram also includes the latitude/longitude

information required for initial programming of FMS
equipment. The included latitude/longitude grid shows the
specific location of each parking area on the airport surface
for use in initializing FMS. Figure 4-19 shows the airport
sketch and diagram for Chicago-O’Hare International
Airport (KORD).
Pilots making approaches to airports that have this type of
complex runway and taxiway configuration must ensure
that they are familiar with the airport diagram prior to
initiating an instrument approach. A combination of poor
weather, high traffic volume, and high ground controller
workload makes the pilot’s job on the ground every bit as
critical as the one just performed in the air.
Instrument Approach Procedure (IAP) Briefing
A thorough instrument approach briefing greatly increases
the likelihood of a successful instrument approach. Most
Part 121, 125, and 135 operators designate specific items
to be included in an IAP briefing, as well as the order in
which those items are briefed.
Before an IAP briefing can begin, flight crews must decide
which procedure is most likely to be flown from the
information that is available to them. Most often, when
the flight is being conducted into an airport that has
ATIS information, the ATIS provides the pilots with the
approaches that are in use. If more than one approach
is in use, the flight crew may have to make an educated
guess as to which approach will be issued to them based
on the weather, direction of their arrival into the area, any
published airport NOTAMs, and previous contact with the
approach control facility. Aircrews can query ATC as to
which approach is to be expected from the controller. Pilots
may request specific approaches to meet the individual
needs of their equipment or regulatory restrictions at any
time and ATC will, in most cases, be able to accommodate
those requests, providing that workload and traffic permit.
If the flight is operating into an airport without a control
tower, the flight crew is occasionally given the choice of
any available instrument approach at the field. In these
cases, the flight crew must choose an appropriate approach
based on the expected weather, aircraft performance,
direction of arrival, airport NOTAMs, and previous
experience at the airport.
Navigation and Communication Radios
Once the anticipated approach and runway have been
selected, each crewmember sets up their side of the flight
deck. The pilots use information gathered from ATIS,
dispatch (if available), ATC, the specific approach chart
for the approach selected, and any other sources that
are available. Company regulations dictate how certain
things are set up and others are left up to pilot technique.
In general, the techniques used at most companies are
similar. This section addresses two-pilot operations. During
single-pilot IFR flights, the same items must be set up and
the pilot should still do an approach briefing to verify that
everything is set up correctly.
The number of items that can be set up ahead of time
depends on the level of automation of the aircraft and the
avionics available. In a conventional flight deck, the only
things that can be set up, in general, are the airspeed bugs
(based on performance calculations), altimeter bug (to DA,
DH, or MDA), go around thrust/power setting, the radio
altimeter bug (if installed and needed for the approach),
and the navigation/communication radios (if a standby
frequency selector is available). The standby side of the PF
navigation radio should be set to the primary NAVAID for
the approach and the PM navigation radio standby selector
should be set to any other NAVAIDs that are required or
available, and as dictated by company procedures, to
add to the overall situational awareness of the crew. The
ADF should also be tuned to an appropriate frequency
as required by the approach, or as selected by the crew.
Aircrews should, as much as possible, set up the instruments
for best success in the event of a vacuum or electrical failure.
For example, if the aircraft will only display Nav 1 on battery
or emergency power, aircrews should ensure that Nav 1 is
configured to the primary NAVAID for the final approach
to be flown.
Flight Management System (FMS)
In addition to the items that are available on a conventional
flight deck aircraft, glass flight deck aircraft, as well as
aircraft with an approved RNAV (GPS) system, usually
give the crew the ability to set the final approach course
for the approach selected and many other options to
increase situational awareness. Crews of FMS equipped
aircraft have many options available as far as setting up
the flight management computer (FMC), depending on
the type of approach and company procedures. The PF
usually programs the FMC for the approach and the PM
verifies the information. A menu of available approaches
is usually available to select from based on the destination
airport programmed at the beginning of the flight or a new
destination selected while en route.
The amount of information provided for the approach
varies from aircraft to aircraft, but the crew can make
modifications if something is not pre-programmed into the
computer, such as adding a MAP or even building an entire
approach for situational awareness purposes only. The PF
can also program a VNAV profile for the descent and LNAV
for segments that were not programmed during preflight,
such as a standard terminal arrival route (STAR) or expected

route to the planned approach. Any crossing restrictions
for the STAR might need to be programmed as well. The
most common crossing restrictions, whether mandatory
or “to be expected,” are usually automatically programmed
when the STAR is selected, but can be changed by ATC at
any time. Other items that need to be set up are dictated
by aircraft-specific procedures, such as autopilot, auto-
throttles, auto-brakes, pressurization system, fuel system,
seat belt signs, anti-icing/ deicing equipment, and igniters.
Autopilot Modes
In general, an autopilot can be used to fly approaches
even if the FMC is inoperative (refer to the specific aircraft’s
minimum equipment list (MEL) to determine authorization
for operating with the FMC inoperative). Whether or not the
FMC is available, use of the autopilot should be discussed
during the approach briefing, especially regarding the use
of the altitude pre-selector and auto-throttles, if equipped.
The AFM for the specific aircraft outlines procedures and
limitations required for the use of the autopilot during an
instrument approach in that aircraft.
There are just as many different autopilot modes to climb
or descend the aircraft, as there are terms for these modes.
Some examples are level change (LVL CHG), vertical speed
(V/S), VNAV, and takeoff/go around (TO/GA). The pilot
controls the aircraft through the autopilot by selecting
pitch modes and/or roll modes, as well as the associated
auto-throttle modes. This panel, sometimes called a mode
control panel, is normally accessible to both pilots. Most
aircraft with sophisticated auto-flight systems and auto-
throttles have the capability to select modes that climb
with maximum climb thrust and descend with the throttles
at idle (LVL CHG, flight level change (FL CHG), and manage
level). They also have the capability to capture, or level
off at pre-selected altitudes, as well as track a LOC and
glideslope (G/S) or a VOR course. If the aircraft is RNAV-
equipped, the autopilot also tracks the RNAV-generated
course. Most of these modes are used at some point during
an instrument approach using the autopilot. Additionally,
these modes can be used to provide flight director (FD)
guidance to the pilot while hand-flying the aircraft.
For the purposes of this precision approach example, the
auto-throttles are engaged when the autopilot is engaged
and specific airspeed and configuration changes are not
discussed. The PF controls airspeed with the speed selector
on the mode control panel and calls for flaps and landing
gear as needed, which the PM selects. The example in
Figure 4-20 begins with the airplane 5 NM northwest of
KNUCK at 4,500 feet with the autopilot engaged, and the
flight has been cleared to track the Rwy 12 LOC inbound.
The current roll mode is LOC with the PF’s NAV radio tuned
to the LOC frequency of 109.3; and the current pitch mode
is altitude hold (ALT HOLD). Approach control clears the
aircraft for the approach. The PF makes no immediate
change to the autopilot mode to prevent the aircraft from
capturing a false glideslope; but the PM resets the altitude
selector to 1,700 feet. The aircraft remains level because
the pitch mode remains in ALT HOLD until another pitch
mode is selected. Upon reaching KNUCK, the PF selects
LVL CHG as the pitch mode. The auto-throttles retard to
idle as the airplane begins a descent. Approaching 1,700
feet, the pitch mode automatically changes to altitude
acquire (ALT ACQ) then to ALT HOLD as the aircraft levels
at 1,700 feet. In addition to slowing the aircraft and calling
for configuration changes, the PF selects approach mode
(APP). The roll mode continues to track the LOC and the
pitch mode remains in ALT HOLD; however, the G/S mode
arms. Selecting APP once the aircraft has leveled at the
FAF altitude is a suggested technique to ensure that the
aircraft captures the glideslope from below and that a false
glideslope is not being tracked.
The PF should have the aircraft fully configured for landing
before intercepting the glideslope to ensure a stabilized
approach. As the aircraft intercepts the glideslope the pitch
mode changes to G/S. Once the glideslope is captured
by the autopilot, the PM can select the missed approach
altitude in the altitude pre-selector, as requested by the PF.
The aircraft continues to track the glideslope. The minimum
altitude at which the PF is authorized to disconnect the
autopilot is aircraft specific. For example, 50 feet below
DA, DH, or MDA but not less than 50 feet AGL. The PF can
disconnect the autopilot at any time prior to reaching
this altitude during a CAT I approach. The initial missed
approach is normally hand flown with FD guidance unless
both autopilots are engaged for auto-land during a CAT II
or III approach.
The differences when flying the underlying non-precision
approach begin when the aircraft has leveled off at 1,700
feet. Once ALT HOLD is annunciated, the MDA is selected
by the PM as requested by the PF. It is extremely important
for both pilots to be absolutely sure that the correct
altitude is selected for the MDA so that the aircraft does not
inadvertently descend below the MDA. For aircraft that the
altitude pre-selector can only select 100 foot increments,
the MDA for this approach must be set at 700 feet instead
of 660 feet.
Vertical speed mode is used from the FAF inbound to
allow for more precise control of the descent. If the pilots
had not selected the MDA in the altitude pre-selector
window, the PF would not be able to input a V/S and the
aircraft would remain level. The autopilot mode changes
from ALT ACQ to ALT HOLD as the aircraft levels at 700 feet.
Once ALT HOLD is annunciated, the PF calls for the missed

approach altitude of 5,000 feet to be selected in the altitude
pre-selector window. This step is very important because
accurate FD guidance is not available to the PF during a
missed approach if the MDA is left in the window.
Note: See“Maximum Acceptable Descent Rates”under the
heading “Descent Rates and Glide paths for Non-precision
Approaches.”
Descents
Stabilized Approach
In IMC, you must continuously evaluate instrument
information throughout an approach to properly maneuver
the aircraft or monitor autopilot performance and to decide
on the proper course of action at the decision point (DA,
DH, or MAP). Significant speed and configuration changes
during an approach can seriously degrade situational
awareness and complicate the decision of the proper action
to take at the decision point. The swept wing handling
characteristics at low airspeeds and slow engine response
of many turbojets further complicate pilot tasks during
approach and landing operations. You must begin to form
a decision concerning the probable success of an approach
before reaching the decision point. Your decision-making
process requires you to be able to determine displacements
from the course or glideslope/glidepath centerline, to
mentally project the aircraft’s three-dimensional flight path
by referring to flight instruments, and then apply control
inputs as necessary to achieve and maintain the desired
approach path. This process is simplified by maintaining a
constant approach speed, descent rate, vertical flight path,
and configuration during the final stages of an approach.
This is referred to as the stabilized approach concept.
A stabilized approach is essential for safe turbojet operations
and commercial turbojet operators must establish and
use procedures that result in stabilized approaches. A
stabilized approach is also strongly recommended for
propeller-driven airplanes and helicopters. You should limit
configuration changes at low altitudes to those changes
that can be easily accommodated without adversely
affecting your workload. For turbojets, the aircraft must
be in an approved configuration for landing or circling,
if appropriate, with the engines spooled up, and on the
correct speed and flight path with a descent rate of less
than 1,000 fpm before descending below the following
minimum stabilized approach heights:
For all straight-in instrument approaches, to include
contact approaches in IFR weather conditions, the
approach must be stabilized before descending
below 1,000 feet above the airport or TDZE.
For visual approaches and straight-in instrument
approaches in VFR weather conditions, the approach
must be stabilized before descending below 500 feet
above the airport elevation.
For the final segment of a circling approach
maneuver, the approach must be stabilized 500 feet
above the airport elevation or at the MDA, whichever
is lower. These conditions must be maintained
throughout the approach until touchdown for the
approach to be considered a stabilized approach.
This also helps you to recognize a wind shear
situation should abnormal indications exist during
the approach.
Descent Rates and Glidepaths for Nonprecision
Approaches
Maximum Acceptable Descent Rates
Operational experience and research have shown that a
descent rate of greater than approximately 1,000 fpm is
unacceptable during the final stages of an approach (below
1,000 feet AGL). This is due to a human perceptual limitation
that is independent of the type of airplane or helicopter.
Therefore, the operational practices and techniques must
ensure that descent rates greater than 1,000 fpm are not
permitted in either the instrument or visual portions of an
approach and landing operation.
For short runways, arriving at the MDA at the MAP when
the MAP is located at the threshold may require a missed
approach for some aircraft. For non-precision approaches,
a descent rate should be used that ensures the aircraft
reaches the MDA at a distance from the threshold that
allows landing in the TDZ. On many IAPs, this distance is
annotated by a VDP. If no VDP is annotated, calculate a
normal descent point to the TDZ. To determine the required
rate of descent, subtract the TDZE from the FAF altitude
and divide this by the time inbound. For example, if the
FAF altitude is 2,000 feet MSL, the TDZE is 400 feet MSL
and the time inbound is two minutes, an 800 fpm rate of
descent should be used.
To verify the aircraft is on an approximate three degree
glidepath, use a calculation of 300 feet to 1 NM. The
glidepath height above TDZE is calculated by multiplying
the NM distance from the threshold by 300. For example,
at 10 NM the aircraft should be 3,000 feet above the TDZE,
at 5 NM the aircraft should be 1,500 feet above the TDZE,
at 2 NM the aircraft should be 600 feet above the TDZE, and
at 1.5 NM the aircraft should be 450 feet above the TDZE
until a safe landing can be made. Using the example in the
previous text, the aircraft should arrive at the MDA (800

Figure 4-20. Example approaches using autopilot.

feet MSL) approximately 1.3 NM from the threshold and in
a position to land within the TDZ. Techniques for deriving a
300-to-1 glide path include using DME, distance advisories
provided by radar-equipped control towers, RNAV, GPS,
dead reckoning, and pilotage when familiar features on the
approach course are visible. The runway threshold should
be crossed at a nominal height of 50 feet above the TDZE.
Transition to a Visual Approach
The transition from instrument flight to visual flight during
an instrument approach can be very challenging, especially
during low visibility operations. Aircrews should use caution
when transitioning to a visual approach at times of shallow
fog. Adequate visibility may not exist to allow flaring of
the aircraft. Aircrews must always be prepared to execute
a missed approach/go-around. Additionally, single-pilot
operations make the transition even more challenging.
Approaches with vertical guidance add to the safety of
the transition to visual because the approach is already
stabilized upon visually acquiring the required references
for the runway. 100 to 200 feet prior to reaching the DA,
DH, or MDA, most of the PM’s attention should be outside
of the aircraft in order to visually acquire at least one visual
reference for the runway, as required by the regulations.
The PF should stay focused on the instruments until the
PM calls out any visual aids that can be seen, or states
“runway in sight.”The PF should then begin the transition
to visual flight. It is common practice for the PM to call out
the V/S during the transition to confirm to the PF that the
instruments are being monitored, thus allowing more of
the PF’s attention to be focused on the visual portion of the
approach and landing. Any deviations from the stabilized
approach criteria should also be announced by the PM.
Single-pilot operations can be much more challenging
because the pilot must continue to fly by the instruments
while attempting to acquire a visual reference for the
runway. While it is important for both pilots of a two-pilot
aircraft to divide their attention between the instruments
and visual references, it is even more critical for the
single- pilot operation. The flight visibility must also be
at least the visibility minimum stated on the instrument
approach chart, or as required by regulations. CAT II and III
approaches have specific requirements that may differ from
CAT I precision or non-precision approach requirements
regarding transition to visual and landing. This information
can be found in the operator’s OpSpecs or FOM.
The visibility published on an approach chart is dependent
on many variables, including the height above touchdown
for straight-in approaches or height above airport elevation
for circling approaches. Other factors include the approach
light system coverage, and type of approach procedure,
Runway
Runway
200 feet
Not to scale
10,000 feet
Figure 4-21. Determination of visibility minimums.
such as precision, non-precision, circling or straight-in.
Another factor determining the minimum visibility is the
penetration of the 34:1 and 20:1 surfaces. These surfaces
are inclined planes that begin 200 feet out from the runway
and extend outward to the DA point (for approaches with
vertical guidance), the VDP location (for non-precision
approaches) and 10,000 feet for an evaluation to a circling
runway. If there is a penetration of the 34:1 surface, the
published visibility can be no lower than three-fourths SM.
If there is penetration of the 20:1 surface, the published
visibility can be no lower than 1 SM with a note prohibiting
approaches to the affected runway at night (both straight-
in and circling). [Figure 4-21 ] Circling may be permitted
at night if penetrating obstacles are marked and lighted.
If the penetrating obstacles are not marked and lighted,
a note is published that night circling is “Not Authorized.”
Pilots should be aware of these penetrating obstacles
when entering the visual and/or circling segments of an
approach and take adequate precautions to avoid them.
For RNAV approaches only, the presence of a grey shaded
line from the MDA to the runway symbol in the profile view
is an indication that the visual segment below the MDA is
clear of obstructions on the 34:1 slope. Absence of the gray
shaded area indicates the 34:1 OCS is not free of obstructions.
[Figure 4-22]
Missed Approach
Many reasons exist for executing a missed approach. The
primary reasons, of course, are that the required flight
visibility prescribed in the IAP being used does not exist
when natural vision is used under 14 CFR Part 91, § 91.175c,
the required enhanced flight visibility is less than that
prescribed in the IAP when an EFVS is used under 14 CFR
Part 91, § 91.176, or the required visual references for the
runway cannot be seen upon arrival at the DA, DH, or
MAP. In addition, according to 14 CFR Part 91, the aircraft
must continuously be in a position from which a descent
to a landing on the intended runway can be made at a

NOT FOR NAVIGATION
010 to 13 JAN 2011
SE-1, 16 DEC 2010 to 1
Figure 4-22. RNAV approach Fort Campbell, Kentucky.
normal rate of descent using normal maneuvers, and for
operations conducted under Part 121 or 135, unless that
descent rate allows touchdown to occur within the TDZ of
the runway of intended landing. CAT II and III approaches
call for different visibility requirements as prescribed by
the FAA Administrator.
Prior to initiating an instrument approach procedure,
the pilot should assess the actions to be taken in the
event of a balked (rejected) landing beyond the missed
approach point or below the MDA or DA (H) considering
the anticipated weather conditions and available aircraft
performance. 14 CFR 91.175(e) authorizes the pilot to
fly an appropriate missed approach procedure that
ensures obstruction clearance, but it does not necessarily
consider separation from other air traffic. The pilot must
consider other factors such as the aircraft’s geographical
location with respect to the prescribed missed approach
point, direction of flight, and/ or the minimum turning
altitudes in the prescribed missed approach procedure.
The pilot must also consider aircraft performance, visual
climb restrictions, charted obstacles, published obstacle
departure procedure, takeoff visual climb requirements
as expressed by nonstandard takeoff minima, other traffic
expected to be in the vicinity, or other factors not
specifically expressed by the approach procedures.
A clearance for an instrument approach procedure
includes a clearance to fly the published missed
approach procedure, unless otherwise instructed
by ATC. Once descent below the DA, DH, or MDA is
begun, a missed approach must be executed if the
required visibility is lost or the runway environment is
no longer visible, unless the loss of sight of the runway
is a result of normal banking of the aircraft during a
circling approach. A MAP is also required upon the
execution of a rejected landing for any reason, such
as men and equipment or animals on the runway, or
if the approach becomes unstabilized and a normal
landing cannot be performed. After the MAP in the
visual segment of a non-precision approach, there may
be hazards when executing a missed approach below
the MDA. The published missed approach procedure
provides obstacle clearance only when the missed
approach is conducted on the missed approach
segment from or above the missed approach point,
and assumes a climb rate of 200 ft/NM or higher, as
published. If the aircraft initiates a missed approach

at a point other than the missed approach point, from
below MDA or DA (H), or on a circling approach, obstacle
clearance is not provided by following the published
missed approach procedure, nor is separation assured from
other air traffic in the vicinity.
The missed approach climb is normally executed at the
MAP. If such a climb is initiated at a higher altitude prior
to the MAP, pilots must be aware of any published climb-
altitude limitations, which must be accounted for when
commencing an early climb. Figure 4-23 gives an example
of an altitude restriction that would prevent a climb
between the FAF and MAP. In this situation, the Orlando
Executive ILS or LOC RWY 7 approach altitude is restricted
at the BUVAY 3 DME fix to prevent aircraft from penetrating
the overlying protected airspace for approach routes into
Orlando International Airport. If a missed approach is
initiated before reaching BUVAY, a pilot may be required
to continue descent to 1,200 feet before proceeding
to the MAP and executing the missed approach climb
instructions. In addition to the missed approach notes
on the chart, the Pilot Briefing Information icons in the
profile view indicate the initial vertical and lateral missed
approach guidance.
The missed approach course begins at the MAP and
continues until the aircraft has reached the designated
fix and a holding pattern has been entered. [Figure 4-24]
In these circumstances, ATC normally issues further
instructions before the aircraft reaches the final fix of
the missed approach course. It is also common for the
designated fix to be an IAF so that another approach
attempt can be made without having to fly from the
holding fix to an IAF.
In the event a balked (rejected) landing occurs at a position
other than the published missed approach point, the
pilot should contact ATC as soon as possible to obtain an
amended clearance. If unable to contact ATC for any reason,
the pilot should attempt to re−intercept a published
segment of the missed approach and comply with route
and altitude instructions. If unable to contact ATC, and
in the pilot’s judgment it is no longer appropriate to fly
the published missed approach procedure, then consider
either maintaining visual conditions (if possible) and
reattempt a landing, or a circle−climb over the airport.
Should a missed approach become necessary when
operating to an airport that is not served by an operating
control tower, continuous contact with an air traffic facility
may not be possible. In this case, the pilot should execute
the appropriate go−around/missed approach procedure
without delay and contact ATC when able to do so.
As shown in Figure 4-25 , there are many different ways
that the MAP can be depicted, depending on the type
of approach. On all approach charts, it is depicted in the
profile and plan views by the end of the solid course
line and the beginning of the dotted missed approach
course line for the top-line/ lowest published minima. For
a precision approach, the MAP is the point at which the
aircraft reaches the DA or DH while on the glideslope/
glidepath. MAPs on non-precision approaches can be
determined in many different ways. If the primary NAVAID
is on the airport, and either a VOR or NDB approach is
being executed, the MAP is normally the point at which
the aircraft passes the NAVAID.
On some non-precision approaches, the MAP is given as
a fixed distance with an associated time from the FAF to
the MAP based on the groundspeed of the aircraft. A table
on the lower right or left hand side of the approach chart
shows the distance in NM from the FAF to the MAP and
the time it takes at specific groundspeeds, given in 30
knot increments. Pilots must determine the approximate
groundspeed and time based on the approach speed and
true airspeed of their aircraft and the current winds along
the final approach course. A clock or stopwatch should be
started at the FAF of an approach requiring this method.
Many non-precision approaches designate a specific fix
as the MAP. These can be identified by a course (LOC or
VOR) and DME, a cross radial from a VOR, or an RNAV (GPS)
waypoint.
Obstacles or terrain in the missed approach segment
may require a steeper climb gradient than the standard
200 ft/NM. If a steeper climb gradient is required, a note
is published on the approach chart plan view with the
penetration description and examples of the required
FPM rate of climb for a given groundspeed (future
charting uses climb gradient). An alternative is normally
charted that allows using the standard climb gradient.
[Figure 4-25] In this example, if the missed approach climb
requirements cannot be met for the Burbank ILS RWY 8
chart, the alternative is to use the LOC RWY 8 that is charted
separately. The LOC RWY 8, S-8 procedure has a MDA that
is 400 feet higher than the ILS RWY 8, S-LOC 8 MDA and
meets the standard climb gradient requirement over the
terrain. For some approaches a new charting standard is
requiring two sets of minimums to be published when
a climb gradient greater than 200 ft/NM is required. The
first set of minimums is the lower of the two, requiring a
climb gradient greater than 200 ft/NM. The second set of
minimums is higher, but doesn’t require a climb gradient.
Shown in Figure 4-26, Barstow-Daggett (KDAG) RNAV
(GPS) RWY 26 is an example where there are two LPV lines
of minimums.

Example Approach Briefing
During an instrument approach briefing, the name of the
airport and the specific approach procedure should be
identified to allow other crewmembers the opportunity
to cross-reference the chart being used for the brief. This
ensures that pilots intending to conduct an instrument
approach have collectively reviewed and verified the
information pertinent to the approach. Figure 4-27
gives an example of the items to be briefed and their
sequence. Although the following example is based on
multi-crew aircraft, the process is also applicable to single-
pilot operations. A complete instrument approach and
operational briefing example follows.
The approach briefing begins with a general discussion of
the ATIS information, weather, terrain, NOTAMs, approaches
in use, runway conditions, performance considerations,
expected route to the final approach course, and the
traffic situation. As the discussion progresses, the items
and format of the briefing become more specific. The
briefing can also be used as a checklist to ensure that
all items have been set up correctly. Most pilots verbally
brief the specific MAP so that it is fresh in their minds and
there is no confusion as to who is doing what during a
missed approach. Also, it is a very good idea to brief the
published missed approach even if the tower is most likely
to give you alternate instructions in the event of a missed
approach. A typical approach briefing might sound like
the following example for a flight inbound to the Monroe
Regional Airport (KMLU):
ATIS: “Monroe Regional Airport Information Bravo, time
2253 Zulu, wind 360 at 10, visibility 1 mile, mist, ceiling 300
overcast, temperature 4, dew point 3, altimeter 29.73, ILS
Runway 4 approach in use, landing and departing Runway
4, advise on initial contact that you have information Bravo.”
PF: “We’re planning an ILS approach to Runway 4 at Monroe
Regional Airport, page 270, effective date 22 Sep 11 to
20 Oct 11. Localizer frequency is 109.5, SABAR Locator
Outer Marker is 392, Monroe VOR is 117.2, final approach
course is 042º. We’ll cross SABAR at 1,483 feet barometric,
decision altitude is 278 feet barometric, touchdown zone
elevation is 78 feet with an airport elevation of 79 feet. MAP
is climb to 2,000 feet, then climbing right turn to 3,000
feet direct Monroe VOR and hold. The MSA is 2,200 feet
to the north and along our missed approach course, and
3,100 feet to the south along the final approach course.
ADF or DME is required for the approach and the airport
has pilot controlled lighting when the tower is closed,
which does not apply to this approach. The runway has a
medium intensity approach lighting system with runway
alignment indicator lights and a precision approach path
indicator (PAPI). We need a half- mile visibility so with one
mile we should be fine. Runway length is 7,507 feet. I’m
planning a flaps 30 approach, auto- brakes 2, left turn on
Alpha or Charlie 1 then Alpha, Golf to the ramp. With a
left crosswind, the runway should be slightly to the right.
I’ll use the autopilot until we break out and, after landing,
I’ll slow the aircraft straight ahead until you say you have
control and I’ll contact ground once we are clear of the
runway. In the case of a missed approach, I’ll press TOGA
(Take-off/Go-Around button used on some turbojets), call
‘go-around thrust, flaps 15, positive climb, gear up, set me
up,’ climb straight ahead to 2,000 feet then climbing right
turn to 3,000 feet toward Monroe or we’ll follow the tower’s
instructions. Any questions?”
PM: “I’ll back up the auto-speedbrakes. Other than that, I
don’t have any questions.”
Instrument Approach Procedure Segments
An instrument approach may be divided into as many as
four approach segments: initial, intermediate, final, and
missed approach. Additionally, feeder routes provide
a transition from the en route structure to the IAF. FAA
Order 8260.3 criteria provides obstacle clearance for each
segment of an approach procedure as shown in Figure 4-28.
Feeder Routes
By definition, a feeder route is a route depicted on IAP
charts to designate routes for aircraft to proceed from the
en route structure to the IAF. [Figure 4-29 ] Feeder routes,
also referred to as approach transitions, technically are
not considered approach segments but are an integral
part of many IAPs. Although an approach procedure may
have several feeder routes, pilots normally choose the one
closest to the en route arrival point. When the IAF is part of
the en route structure, there may be no need to designate
additional routes for aircraft to proceed to the IAF.
When a feeder route is designated, the chart provides
the course or bearing to be flown, the distance, and the
minimum altitude. En route airway obstacle clearance
criteria apply to feeder routes, providing 1,000 feet of
obstacle clearance (2,000 feet in mountainous areas).
Terminal Routes
In cases where the IAF is part of the en route structure
and feeder routes are not required, a transition or terminal
route is still needed for aircraft to proceed from the IAF to
the intermediate fix (IF). These routes are initial approach
segments because they begin at the IAF. Like feeder routes,
they are depicted with course, minimum altitude, and
distance to the IF. Essentially, these routes accomplish the

same thing as feeder routes but they originate at an IAF,
whereas feeder routes terminate at an IAF. [Figure 4-30 ]
DME Arcs
DME arcs also provide transitions to the approach course,
but DME arcs are actually approach segments while feeder
routes, by definition, are not. When established on a DME
arc, the aircraft has departed the en route phase and has
begun the approach and is maneuvering to enter an
intermediate or final segment of the approach. DME arcs
may also be used as an intermediate or a final segment,
although they are extremely rare as final approach
segments.
An arc may join a course at or before the IF. When joining
a course at or before the IF, the angle of intersection of the
arc and the course is designed so it does not exceed 120°.
When the angle exceeds 90°, a radial that provides at least 2
NM of lead will be identified to assist in leading the turn on
to the intermediate course. DME arcs are predicated on DME
collocated with a facility providing omnidirectional course
information, such as a VOR. A DME arc cannot be based on
an ILS or LOC DME source because omnidirectional course
information is not provided.
The ROC along the arc depends on the approach segment.
For an initial approach segment, a ROC of 1,000 feet is
required in the primary area, which extends to 4 NM on
either side of the arc. For an intermediate segment primary
area, the ROC is 500 feet. The initial and intermediate
segment secondary areas extend 2 NM from the primary
boundary area edge. The ROC starts at the primary area
boundary edge at 500 feet and tapers to zero feet at the
secondary area outer edge. [Figure 4-31 ]
Course Reversal
Some approach procedures do not permit straight-in
approaches unless pilots are being radar vectored. In these
situations, pilots are required to complete a procedure turn
(PT) or other course reversal, generally within 10 NM of the
PT fix, to establish the aircraft inbound on the intermediate
or final approach segment.
If Category E airplanes are using the PT or there is a descent
gradient problem, the PT distance available can be as much
as 15 NM. During a procedure turn, a maximum speed of
200 knots indicated airspeed (KIAS) should be observed
from first crossing the course reversal IAF through the
procedure turn maneuver to ensure containment within
the obstruction clearance area. Unless a holding pattern
or teardrop procedure is published, the point where pilots
begin the turn and the type and rate of turn are optional.
If above the procedure turn minimum altitude, pilots may
begin descent as soon as they cross the IAF outbound.
A procedure turn is the maneuver prescribed to perform
a course reversal to establish the aircraft inbound on an
intermediate or final approach course. The procedure turn
or hold-in-lieu-of procedure turn is a required maneuver
when it is depicted on the approach chart. However, the
procedure turn or the hold-in-lieu-of PT is not permitted
when the symbol “No PT” is depicted on the initial segment
being flown, when a RADAR VECTOR to the final approach
course is provided, or when conducting a timed approach
from a holding fix.
The altitude prescribed for the procedure turn is a
minimum altitude until the aircraft is established on the
inbound course. The maneuver must be completed within
the distance specified in the profile view. This distance is
usually 10 miles. This may be reduced to five miles where
only Category A or helicopter aircraft are operated. This
distance may be increased to as much as 15 miles to
accommodate high performance aircraft.
The pilot may elect to use the procedure turn or hold-in­
lieu-of PT when it is not required by the procedure, but
must first receive an amended clearance from ATC. When
ATC is radar vectoring to the final approach course, or to
the intermediate fix as may occur with RNAV standard
instrument approach procedures, ATC may specify in
the approach clearance “CLEARED STRAIGHT-IN (type)
APPROACH” to ensure that the pilot understands that the
procedure turn or hold-in-lieu-of PT is not to be flown. If
the pilot is uncertain whether ATC intends for a procedure
turn or a straight-in approach to be flown, the pilot will
immediately request clarification from ATC.
On U.S. Government charts, a barbed arrow indicates the
maneuvering side of the outbound course on which the
procedure turn is made. Headings are provided for course
reversal using the 45° type procedure turn. However, the
point at which the turn may be commenced and the type
and rate of turn is left to the discretion of the pilot (limited
by the charted remain within XX NM distance). Some of the
options are the 45° procedure turn, the racetrack pattern,
the teardrop procedure turn, or the 80° procedure turn, or
the 80°
260° course reversal. Racetrack entries should
be conducted on the maneuvering side where the majority
of protected airspace resides. If an entry places the pilot
on the non-maneuvering side of the PT, correction to
intercept the outbound course ensures remaining within
protected airspace.
Some procedure turns are specified by procedural track.
These turns must be flown exactly as depicted. These

Figure 4-23. Orlando Executive Airport, Orlando, Florida, ILS RWY 7.

NOT FOR NAVIGATION
SC-2, 18 NOV 2010 to 16 DEC 2010
SC-2, 18 NOV 2010 to 16 DEC 2010
Figure 4-24 Missed approach procedures for Dallas-Fort Worth International (DFW)4

NOT FOR NAVIGATION
DEC
, 18 N
W-3,
This NOTE on the ILS RWY 8 chart for the missed approach climb requirement
applies to all lines of minimums. If you are unable to make the climb rate/gradient,
you must use the higher minimums on the separately published LOC RWY 8
chart that meet the standard climb gradient of 200 ft/NM.
S
Figure 4-25. Missed approach point depiction and steeper than standard climb gradient requirements.
requirements are necessary to stay within the protected
The primary and secondary areas determine obstacle
airspace and maintain adequate obstacle clearance. [Figure
clearance in both the entry and maneuvering zones. The
4-32] A minimum of 1,000 feet of obstacle clearance is
use of entry and maneuvering zones provides further relief
provided in the procedure turn primary area. [Figure 4-33]
from obstacles. The entry zone is established to control the
In the secondary area, 500 feet of obstacle clearance is
obstacle clearance prior to proceeding outbound from the
provided at the inner edge, tapering uniformly to 0 feet
procedure turn fix. The maneuvering zone is established
at the outer edge.
to control obstacle clearance after proceeding outbound
from the procedure turn fix.

Figure 4-26. Two sets of minimums required when a climb gradient greater than 200 ft/NM is required.

Figure 4-27. Example of approach chart briefing sequence.

Descent to the PT completion altitude from the PT fix
altitude (when one has been published or assigned by ATC)
must not begin until crossing over the PT fix or abeam and
proceeding outbound. Some procedures contain a note in
the chart profile view that says “Maintain (altitude) or above
until established outbound for procedure turn.” Newer
procedures simply depict an “at or above” altitude at the PT
fix without a chart note. Both are there to ensure required
obstacle clearance is provided in the procedure turn
entry zone. Absence of a chart note or specified minimum
altitude adjacent to the PT fix is an indication that descent
to the procedure turn altitude can commence immediately
upon crossing over the PT fix, regardless of the direction
of flight. This is because the minimum altitudes in the PT
entry zone and the PT maneuvering zone are the same.
A holding pattern-in-lieu-of procedure turn may be
specified for course reversal in some procedures. In
such cases, the holding pattern is established over an
intermediate fix or a FAF. The holding pattern distance or
time specified in the profile view must be observed. For a
hold-in-lieu-of PT, the holding pattern direction must be
flown as depicted and the specified leg length/timing must
not be exceeded. Maximum holding airspeed limitations as
set forth for all holding patterns apply. The holding pattern
maneuver is completed when the aircraft is established on
the inbound course after executing the appropriate entry.
If cleared for the approach prior to returning to the holding
fix and the aircraft is at the prescribed altitude, additional
circuits of the holding pattern are not necessary nor
expected by ATC. If pilots elect to make additional circuits
to lose excessive altitude or to become better established
on course, it is their responsibility to so advise ATC upon
receipt of their approach clearance. Refer to the AIM section
5-4-9 for additional information on holding procedures.
Initial Approach Segment
The purposes of the initial approach segment are to provide
a method for aligning the aircraft with the intermediate
or final approach segment and to permit descent during
the alignment. This is accomplished by using a DME arc,
a course reversal, such as a procedure turn or holding
pattern, or by following a terminal route that intersects
the final approach course. The initial approach segment
begins at an IAF and usually ends where it joins the
intermediate approach segment or at an IF. The letters IAF
on an approach chart indicate the location of an IAF and
more than one may be available. Course, distance, and
minimum altitudes are also provided for initial approach
segments. A given procedure may have several initial
approach segments. When more than one exists, each joins
a common intermediate segment, although not necessarily
at the same location.
Many RNAV approaches make use of a dual-purpose IF/
IAF associated with a hold-in-lieu-of PT (HILO) anchored at
the Intermediate Fix. The HILO forms the Initial Approach
Segment when course reversal is required.
When the PT is required, it is only necessary to enter the
holding pattern to reverse course. The dual purpose fix
functions as an IAF in that case. Once the aircraft has
entered the hold and is returning to the fix on the inbound
course, the dual-purpose fix becomes an IF, marking the
beginning of the intermediate segment.
ATC may provide a vector to an IF at an angle of 90 degrees
or less and specify “Cleared Straight-in (type) Approach”.
In those cases, the radar vector is providing the initial
approach segment and the pilot should not fly the PT
without a clearance from ATC.
Occasionally, a chart may depict an IAF, although there is
no initial approach segment for the procedure. This usually
occurs at a point located within the en route structure
where the intermediate segment begins. In this situation,
the IAF signals the beginning of the intermediate segment.
Intermediate Approach Segment
The intermediate segment is designed primarily to position
the aircraft for the final descent to the airport. Like the feeder
route and initial approach segment, the chart depiction of
the intermediate segment provides course, distance, and
minimum altitude information.
The intermediate segment, normally aligned within 30° of
the final approach course, begins at the IF, or intermediate
point, and ends at the beginning of the final approach
segment. In some cases, an IF is not shown on an approach
chart. In this situation, the intermediate segment begins at
a point where you are proceeding inbound to the FAF, are
properly aligned with the final approach course, and are
located within the prescribed distance prior to the FAF. An
instrument approach that incorporates a procedure turn
is the most common example of an approach that may
not have a charted IF. The intermediate segment in this
example begins when you intercept the inbound course
after completing the procedure turn. [Figure 4-34]
Final Approach Segment
The final approach segment for an approach with vertical
guidance or a precision approach begins where the
glideslope/glidepath intercepts the minimum glideslope/
glidepath intercept altitude shown on the approach
chart. If ATC authorizes a lower intercept altitude, the final
approach segment begins upon glideslope/glidepath

Feeder route
FAF
IF
IAF
Runway
Initial
Intermediate
Final
Missed
approach
Re-enter
En route phase
IAF
IF
FAF
Obstacle
Flightpath
Map
500 feet
1,000 feet
1,000 feet
250 feet
Project view
Profile view
Plan view
Figure 4-28. Approach segments and obstacle clearance.
interception at that altitude. For a non-precision approach,
the final approach segment begins either at a designated
FAF, which is depicted as a cross on the profile view, or at
the point where the aircraft is established inbound on the
final approach course. When a FAF is not designated, such
as on an approach that incorporates an on-airport VOR
or NDB, this point is typically where the procedure turn
intersects the final approach course inbound. This point
is referred to as the final approach point (FAP). The final
approach segment ends at either the designated MAP or
upon landing.
There are three types of procedures based on the final
approach course guidance:
Precision approach (PA)—an instrument approach
based on a navigation system that provides course
and glidepath deviation information meeting
precision standards of ICAO Annex 10. For example,
PAR, ILS, and GLS are precision approaches.
Approach with vertical guidance (APV) —an
instrument approach based on a navigation system
that is not required to meet the precision approach
standards of ICAO Annex 10, but provides course
and glidepath deviation information. For example,
Baro-VNAV, LDA with glidepath, LNAV/VNAV and LPV
are APV approaches.
Non-precision approach (NPA)—an instrument
approach based on a navigation system that
provides course deviation information but no
glidepath deviation information. For example, VOR,
TACAN, LNAV, NDB, LOC, and ASR approaches are
examples of NPA procedures.
Missed Approach Segment
The missed approach segment begins at the MAP and ends
at a point or fix where an initial or en route segment begins.
The actual location of the MAP depends upon the type of
approach you are flying. For example, during a precision
or an APV approach, the MAP occurs at the DA or DH on
the glideslope/glidepath. For non-precision approaches,
the MAP is either a fix, NAVAID, or after a specified period
of time has elapsed after crossing the FAF.
Approach Clearance
According to FAA Order 7110.65, ATC clearances authorizing
instrument approaches are issued on the basis that if visual
contact with the ground is made before the approach is
completed, the entire approach procedure is followed
unless the pilot receives approval for a contact approach, is
cleared for a visual approach, or cancels the IFR flight plan.
Approach clearances are issued based on known traffic.
The receipt of an approach clearance does not relieve the
pilot of his or her responsibility to comply with applicable

Figure 4-29. Feeder routes.

Figure 4-30. Terminal routes.

NM
NM
4 NM
4 NM
feet
feet
1,000
feet
Initial segment
Intermediate
segment
feet
feet
VORTAC
NM
NM
4 NM
4 NM
Length
The intermediate segment may NOT be less than
5 NM nor more than 15 NM in length, measured
along the arc. The OPTIMUM length is 10 NM.
A distance greater than 10 NM should not be used
unless an operational requirement justifies the
greater distance.
Width
The total width of an arc intermediate segment is 6
NM on each side of the arc. For obstacle clearance
purposes, this width is divided into a primary and a
secondary area. The primary area extends 4 NM
laterally on each side of the arc segment. The
secondary areas extend 2 NM laterally on each side
of the primary area.
Required Obstacle Clearance (ROC)
The ROC is 1,000 feet for the primary initial segment.
The secondary area ROC starts at the primary ROC
surface tapering to zero at the edges of the secondary
area in both initial and intermediate areas. In the
primary area of the intermediate segment, the ROC is
500 feet.
Figure 4-31. DME arc obstruction clearance.
parts of the CFRs and notations on instrument approach
charts, which impose on the pilot the responsibility to
comply with or act on an instruction, such as “procedure
not authorized at night.” The name of the approach, as
published, is used to identify the approach. Approach name
items within parentheses are not included in approach
clearance phraseology.
Vectors To Final Approach Course
The approach gate is an imaginary point used within ATC
as a basis for vectoring aircraft to the final approach course.
The gate is established along the final approach course one
mile from the FAF on the side away from the airport and is
no closer than 5 NM from the landing threshold. Controllers
are also required to ensure the assigned altitude conforms
to the following:
For a precision approach, at an altitude not above
the glideslope/glidepath or below the minimum
glideslope/glidepath intercept altitude specified
on the approach procedure chart.
For a non-precision approach, at an altitude that
allows descent in accordance with the published
procedure.
Further, controllers must assign headings that
intercept the final approach course no closer than
the following table:
A typical vector to the final approach course and associated
approach clearance is as follows:
“…four miles from LIMAA, turn right heading three four
zero, maintain two thousand until established on the
localizer, cleared ILS runway three six approach.”
Other clearance formats may be used to fit individual
circumstances, but the controller should always assign an
altitude to maintain until the aircraft is established on a
segment of a published route or IAP. The altitude assigned
must guarantee IFR obstruction clearance from the point at
which the approach clearance is issued until the aircraft is
established on a published route. 14 CFR Part 91, § 91.175
(j) prohibits a pilot from making a procedure turn when
vectored to a FAF or course, when conducting a timed
approach, or when the procedure specifies “NO PT.”
When vectoring aircraft to the final approach course,
controllers are required to ensure the intercept is at least

Reversal fix may
be specified
Complete in “remain
within” distance
The 45°/180° procedure turn
Base turn
The 80°/260° procedure turn
Racetrack procedure
Specified time or depicted fix
1 minute
Reversal fix may
be specified
Complete in “remain
within” distance
1 min 15 sec
-Cat C,D&E
Figure 4-32. Course reversal methods.
2 NM outside the approach gate. Exceptions include the
following situations, but do not apply to RNAV aircraft
being vectored for a GPS or RNAV approach:
When the reported ceiling is at least 500 feet above
the MVA/MIA and the visibility is at least 3 SM (may
be a pilot report (PIREP) if no weather is reported for
the airport), aircraft may be vectored to intercept
the final approach course closer than 2 NM outside
the approach gate but no closer than the approach
gate.
If specifically requested by the pilot, aircraft may
be vectored to intercept the final approach course
inside the approach gate but no closer than the FAF.
Nonradar Environment
In the absence of radar vectors, an instrument approach
begins at an IAF. An aircraft that has been cleared to
a holding fix that, prior to reaching that fix, is issued a
clearance for an approach, but not issued a revised routing,
such as, “proceed direct to…” is expected to proceed via the
last assigned route, a feeder route if one is published on
the approach chart, and then to commence the approach
as published. If, by following the route of flight to the
holding fix, the aircraft would overfly an IAF or the fix
associated with the beginning of a feeder route to be used,
the aircraft is expected to commence the approach using
the published feeder route to the IAF or from the IAF as
appropriate. The aircraft would not be expected to overfly
and return to the IAF or feeder route.
For aircraft operating on unpublished routes, an altitude
is assigned to maintain until the aircraft is established
on a segment of a published route or IAP. (Example:
“Maintain 2,000 until established on the final approach
course outbound, cleared VOR/DME runway 12.”) The FAA
definition of established on course requires the aircraft
to be established on the route centerline. Generally, the
controller assigns an altitude compatible with glideslope/
glidepath intercept prior to being cleared for the approach.
Types of Approaches
In the NAS, there are approximately 1,105 VOR stations, 916
NDB stations, and 1,194 ILS installations, including 25 LOC-
type directional aids (LDAs), 11 simplified directional facilities
(SDFs), and 235 LOC only facilities. As time progresses, it is
the intent of the FAA to reduce navigational dependence on
VOR, NDB, and other ground-based NAVAIDs and, instead,
to increase the use of satellite-based navigation.
To expedite the use of RNAV procedures for all instrument
pilots, the FAA has begun an aggressive schedule to
develop RNAV procedures. As of 2010, the number of
RNAV/ GPS approaches published in the NAS numbered

Obstacle
Obstacle
Entry zone
Maneuvering zone
Procedure turn completion altitude
Altitude restricted until completing
departing turn fix outbound
6,000
6,900
7,700
1,000 feet
1,000 feet
Figure 4-33. Procedure turn obstacle clearance.
10,212 - with additional procedures published every revision
cycle. While it had originally been the plan of the FAA to
begin decommissioning VORs, NDBs, and other ground-
based NAVAIDs, the overall strategy has been changed to
incorporate a majority dependence on augmented satellite
navigation while maintaining a satisfactory backup system.
This backup system includes retaining all CAT II and III ILS
facilities and close to one-half of the existing VOR network.
Each approach is provided obstacle clearance based on the
FAA Order 8260.3 TERPS design criteria as appropriate for
the surrounding terrain, obstacles, and NAVAID availability.
Final approach obstacle clearance is different for every
type of approach but is guaranteed from the start of the
final approach segment to the runway (not below the MDA
for non-precision approaches) or MAP, whichever occurs
last within the final approach area. It is dependent upon
the pilot to maintain an appropriate flight path within
the boundaries of the final approach area and maintain
obstacle clearance.
There are numerous types of instrument approaches
available for use in the NAS including RNAV (GPS), ILS, MLS,
LOC, VOR, NDB, SDF, and radar approaches. Each approach
has separate and individual design criteria, equipment
requirements, and system capabilities.
Visual and Contact Approaches
To expedite traffic, ATC may clear pilots for a visual
approach in lieu of the published approach procedure if

Initial approach segment
Feeder route
En route fix
IAF
FAF
Beginning of intermediate segment
Figure 4-34. Approach without a designated IF.
flight conditions permit. Requesting a contact approach
may be advantageous since it requires less time than
the published IAP and provides separation from IFR and
special visual flight rules (SVFR) traffic. A contact or visual
approach may be used in lieu of conducting a SIAP, and
both allow the flight to continue as an IFR flight to landing
while increasing the efficiency of the arrival.
Visual Approaches
When it is operationally beneficial, ATC may authorize
pilots to conduct a visual approach to the airport in
lieu of the published IAP. A pilot, or the controller,
can initiate a visual approach. Before issuing a visual
approach clearance, ATC must verify that the pilot
has the airport, or a preceding aircraft that they are to
follow, in sight. Once the pilot reports the airport, or
aircraft, in sight, the pilot is responsible to maintain safe
altitudes and separation from other aircraft. If the pilot
reports the airport in sight but does not see the aircraft
they are assigned to follow, ATC may still issue the
visual approach clearance but the controller maintains
responsibility for aircraft separation (including wake
turbulence separation). Once pilots report the aircraft
in sight, they assume the responsibilities for their own
separation and wake turbulence avoidance.
A visual approach is an ATC authorization for an aircraft
on an IFR flight plan to proceed visually to the airport of
intended landing; it is not an IAP. Also, there is no missed
approach segment. An aircraft unable to complete a visual
approach must be handled as any other go-around and
appropriate separation must be provided. A vector for a
visual approach may be initiated by ATC if the reported
ceiling at the airport of intended landing is at least 500 feet
above the MVA/MIA and the visibility is 3 SM or greater. At
airports without weather reporting service, there must be
reasonable assurance through area weather reports and
PIREPs that descent and approach to the airport can be
made visually, and the pilot must be informed that weather
information is not available.
The visual approach clearance is issued to expedite the flow
of traffic to an airport. It is authorized when the ceiling is
reported or expected to be at least 1,000 feet AGL and the

visibility is at least 3 SM. Pilots must remain clear of the
clouds at all times while conducting a visual approach. At
an airport with a control tower, pilots may be cleared to fly a
visual approach to one runway while others are conducting
VFR or IFR approaches to another parallel, intersecting, or
converging runway. Also, when radar service is provided,
it is automatically terminated when the controller advises
pilots to change to the tower or advisory frequency. While
conducting a visual approach, the pilot is responsible for
providing safe obstacle clearance.
Contact Approaches
If conditions permit, pilots can request a contact approach,
which is then authorized by the controller. A contact
approach cannot be initiated by ATC. This procedure may
be used instead of the published procedure to expedite
arrival, as long as the airport has a SIAP the reported ground
visibility is at least 1 SM, and pilots are able to remain clear
of clouds with at least one statute mile flight visibility
throughout the approach. Some advantages of a contact
approach are that it usually requires less time than the
published instrument procedure, it allows pilots to retain
the IFR clearance, and provides separation from IFR and
SVFR traffic. On the other hand, obstruction clearances and
VFR traffic avoidance becomes the pilot’s responsibility.
Unless otherwise restricted, the pilot may find it necessary
to descend, climb, or fly a circuitous route to the airport to
maintain cloud clearance or terrain/ obstruction clearance.
The main differences between a visual approach and
a contact approach are: a pilot must request a contact
approach, while a visual approach may be assigned by ATC
or requested by the pilot; and a contact approach may be
approved with one mile visibility if the flight can remain
clear of clouds, while a visual approach requires the pilot
to have the airport in sight, or a preceding aircraft to be
followed, and the ceiling must be at least 1,000 feet AGL
with at least 3 SM visibility.
Charted Visual Flight Procedures
A charted visual flight procedure (CVFP) may be established
at some airports with control towers for environmental or
noise considerations, as well as when necessary for the
safety and efficiency of air traffic operations. Designed
primarily for turbojet aircraft, CVFPs depict prominent
landmarks, courses, and recommended altitudes to specific
runways. When pilots are flying the Roaring Fork Visual
RWY 15, shown in Figure 4-35, mountains, rivers, and towns
provide guidance to Aspen, Colorado’s Sardy Field instead
of VORs, NDBs, and DME fixes.
Pilots must have a charted visual landmark or a preceding
aircraft in sight, and weather must be at or above the
published minimums before ATC will issue a CVFP
clearance. ATC will clear pilots for a CVFP if the reported
ceiling at the airport of intended landing is at least 500
feet above the MVA/MIA, and the visibility is 3 SM or more,
unless higher minimums are published for the particular
CVFP. When accepting a clearance to follow traffic, the pilot
is responsible for maintaining a safe altitude, approach
interval and wake turbulence separation from other aircraft
Pilots must advise ATC if unable at any point to continue
a charted visual approach or if the pilot loses sight of the
preceding aircraft.
RNAV Approaches
Because of the complications with database coding,
naming conventions were changed in January 2001 to
accommodate all approaches using RNAV equipment into
one classification which is RNAV. This classification includes
both ground- based and satellite dependent systems.
Eventually all approaches that use some type of RNAV will
reflect RNAV in the approach title.
This changeover is being made to reflect two shifts in
instrument approach technology. The first shift is the
use of the RNP concept outlined in Chapter 1, Departure
Procedures, in which a single performance standard
concept is being implemented for departure/approach
procedure design. Through the use of RNP, the underlying
system of navigation may not be required, provided the
aircraft can maintain the appropriate RNP standard. The
second shift is advanced avionics systems, such as FMS,
used by most airlines, needed a new navigation standard by
which RNAV could be fully integrated into the instrument
approach system.
An FMS uses multi-sensor navigation inputs to produce
a composite position. Essentially, the FMS navigation
function automatically blends or selects position sensors to
compute aircraft position. Instrument approach charts and
RNAV databases needed to change to reflect these issues.
A complete discussion of airborne navigation databases
is included in Chapter 6, Airborne Navigation Databases.
Due to the multi- faceted nature of RNAV, new approach
criteria have been developed to accommodate the design

of RNAV instrument approaches. This includes criteria for
terminal arrival areas (TAAs), RNAV basic approach criteria,
and specific final approach criteria for different types of
RNAV approaches.
Terminal Arrival Areas
The Terminal Arrival Area (TAA) provides a transition
from the en route structure to the terminal environment
with little required pilot/air traffic control interface for
aircraft equipped with Area Navigation (RNAV) systems.
TAAs provide minimum altitudes with standard obstacle
clearance when operating within the TAA boundaries.
TAAs are primarily used on RNAV approaches but may be
used on an ILS approach when RNAV is the sole means for
navigation to the IF; however, they are not normally used
in areas of heavy concentration of air traffic . [Figure 4-36]
The basic design of the RNAV procedure underlying the
TAA is normally the “T” design (also called the “Basic T”).
The “T” design incorporates two IAFs plus a dual purpose
IF/IAF that functions as both an intermediate fix and an
initial approach fix. The T configuration continues from the
IF/IAF to the FAF and then to the MAP. The two base leg
IAFs are typically aligned in a straight-line perpendicular to
the intermediate course connecting at the IF/IAF. A Hold-
in-Lieu-of Procedure Turn (HILO) is anchored at the IF/IAF
and depicted on U.S. Government publications using the
“hold−in−lieu−of−PT” holding pattern symbol. When the
HILO is necessary for course alignment and/or descent,
the dual purpose IF/IAF serves as an IAF during the entry
into the pattern. Following entry into the HILO pattern
and when flying a route or sector labeled “NoPT,” the dual-
purpose fix serves as an IF, marking the beginning of the
Intermediate Segment.
The standard TAA based on the “T” design consists of
three areas defined by the IAF legs and the intermediate
segment course beginning at the IF/IAF. These areas are
called the straight−in, left−base, and right−base areas.
[Figure 4-36] TAA area lateral boundaries are identified
by magnetic courses TO the IF/IAF. The straight−in area
can be further divided into pie−shaped sectors with the
boundaries identified by magnetic courses TO the IF/ IAF,
and may contain step-down sections defined by arcs based
on RNAV distances from the IF/IAF.
Entry from the terminal area onto the procedure is normally
accomplished via a no procedure turn (NoPT) routing or via
a course reversal maneuver. The published procedure will
be annotated “NoPT” to indicate when the course reversal
is not authorized when flying within a particular TAA sector
[Figures 4-36 and 4-37]. Otherwise, the pilot is expected
to execute the course reversal under the provisions of 14
CFR § 91.175. The pilot may elect to use the course reversal
pattern when it is not required by the procedure, but must
receive clearance from air traffic control before beginning
the procedure.
ATC should not clear an aircraft to the left base leg or right
base leg IAF within a TAA at an intercept angle exceeding 90
degrees. Pilots must not execute the HILO course reversal
when the sector or procedure segment is labeled “NoPT.”
ATC may clear aircraft direct to the fix labeled IF/IAF if
the course to the IF/IAF is within the straight-in sector
labeled “NoPT” and the intercept angle does not exceed
90 degrees. Pilots are expected to proceed direct to the IF/
IAF and accomplish a straight-in approach. Do not execute
HILO course reversal. Pilots are also expected to fly the
straight−in approach when ATC provides radar vectors and
monitoring to the IF/IAF and issues a“straight-in” approach
clearance; otherwise, the pilot is expected to execute the
HILO course reversal. (See AIM Paragraph 5−4−6, Approach
Clearance)
On rare occasions, ATC may clear the aircraft for an
approach at the airport without specifying the approach
procedure by name or by a specific approach (e.g., “cleared
RNAV Runway 34 approach”) without specifying a particular
IAF. In either case, the pilot should proceed direct to the IAF
or to the IF/IAF associated with the sector that the aircraft
will enter the TAA and join the approach course from that
point and if required by that sector (i.e., sector is not labeled
“NoPT), complete the HILO course reversal.
Note: If approaching with a TO bearing that is on a sector
boundary, the pilot is expected to proceed in accordance
with a “NoPT” routing unless otherwise instructed by ATC.
Altitudes published within the TAA replace the MSA alti­
tude. However, unlike MSA altitudes the TAA altitudes are
operationally usable altitudes. These altitudes provide at
least 1,000 feet of obstacle clearance, and more in moun­
tainous areas. It is important that the pilot knows which
area of the TAA that the aircraft will enter in order to com­
ply with the minimum altitude requirements. The pilot
can determine which area of the TAA the aircraft will enter
by determining the magnetic bearing of the aircraft TO
the fix labeled IF/IAF. The bearing should then be com­
pared to the published lateral boundary bearings that
define the TAA areas. Do not use magnetic bearing to the
right-base or left-base IAFs to determine position.
An ATC clearance direct to an IAF or to the IF/IAF with­
out an approach clearance does not authorize a pilot to
descend to a lower TAA altitude. If a pilot desires a low­

Figure 4-35. Charted visual flight procedures (CVFP).

er altitude without an approach clearance, request the
lower TAA altitude from ATC. Pilots not sure of the clear­
ance should confirm their clearance with ATC or request a
specific clearance. Pilots entering the TAA with two−way
radio communications failure (14 CFR § 91.185, IFR Op­
erations: Two−way Radio Communications Failure), must
maintain the highest altitude prescribed by 14 CFR §
91.185(c)(2) until arriving at the appropriate IAF.
Once cleared for the approach, pilots may descend in the
TAA sector to the minimum altitude depicted within the
defined area/subdivision, unless instructed otherwise by
air traffic control. Pilots should plan their descent within
the TAA to permit a normal descent from the IF/IAF to the
FAF.
U.S. Government charts depict TAAs using icons located
in the plan view outside the depiction of the actual ap­
proach procedure. Use of icons is necessary to avoid ob­
scuring any portion of the “T” procedure (altitudes, cours­
es, minimum altitudes, etc.). The icon for each TAA area
will be located and oriented on the plan view with respect
to the direction of arrival to the approach procedure, and
will show all TAA minimum altitudes and sector/radius
subdivisions. The IAF for each area of the TAA is included
on the icon where it appears on the approach to help the
pilot orient the icon to the approach procedure. The IAF
name and the distance of the TAA area boundary from the
IAF are included on the outside arc of the TAA area icon.
TAAs may be modified from the standard size and shape
to accommodate operational or ATC requirements. Some
areas may be eliminated, while the other areas are ex­
panded. The “T” design may be modified by the proce­
dure designers where required by terrain or ATC consider­
ations. For instance, the “T” design may appear more like
a regularly or irregularly shaped “Y,” an upside down “L,”
or an “I.”
When an airway does not cross the lateral TAA boundar­
ies, a feeder route will be established from an airway fix
or NAVAID to the TAA boundary to provide a transition
from the en route structure to the appropriate IAF. Each
feeder route will terminate at the TAA boundary and will
be aligned along a path pointing to the associated IAF.
Pilots should descend to the TAA altitude after crossing
the TAA boundary and cleared for the approach by ATC.
Each waypoint on the “T” is assigned a pronounceable 5−
letter name, except the missed approach waypoint. These
names are used for ATC communications, RNAV data­
bases, and aeronautical navigation products. The missed
approach waypoint is assigned a pronounceable name
when it is not located at the runway threshold.
RNAV Approach Types
RNAV encompasses a variety of underlying navigation
systems and, therefore, approach criteria. This results in
different sets of criteria for the final approach segment
of various RNAV approaches. RNAV instrument approach
criteria address the following procedures:
GPS overlay of pre-existing nonprecision approaches.
VOR/DME based RNAV approaches.
Stand-alone RNAV (GPS) approaches.
RNAV (GPS) approaches with vertical guidance (APV).
RNAV (GPS) precision approaches (WAAS and LAAS).
GPS Overlay of Nonprecision Approach
The original GPS approach procedures provided
authorization to fly non-precision approaches based
on conventional, ground-based NAVAIDs. Many of
these approaches have been converted to stand-alone
approaches, and the few that remain are identified by
the name of the procedure and “or GPS.” These GPS non-
precision approaches are predicated upon the design
criteria of the ground-based NAVAID used as the basis of
the approach. As such, they do not adhere to the RNAV
design criteria for stand-alone GPS approaches, and are not
considered part of the RNAV (GPS) approach classification
for determining design criteria. [Figure 4-38]
GPS Stand-Alone/RNAV (GPS) Approach
The number of GPS stand-alone approaches continues to
decrease as they are replaced by RNAV approaches. RNAV
(GPS) approaches are named so that airborne navigation
databases can use either GPS or RNAV as the title of the
approach. This is required for non-GPS approach systems,
such as VOR/DME based RNAV systems. In the past,
these approaches were often referred to as "stand-alone
GPS" approaches. They are considered non-precision
approaches, offering only LNAV and circling minimums.
Precision minimums are not authorized, although LNAV/
VNAV minimums may be published and used as long as
the on-board system is capable of providing approach
approved VNAV. The RNAV (GPS) Runway 14 approach for
Lincoln, Nebraska, incorporates only LNAV and circling
minimums. [Figure 4-39]
For a non-vertically guided straight-in RNAV (GPS)
approach, the final approach course must be aligned within
15° of the extended runway centerline. The final approach
segment should not exceed 10 NM, and when it exceeds 6
NM, a stepdown fix is typically incorporated. A minimum

Figure 4-36. Terminal arrival area (TAA) design “basic T.”
of 250 feet obstacle clearance is also incorporated into the
final approach segment for straight-in approaches, and a
maximum 400-ft/NM descent gradient is permitted.
The approach design criteria are different for approaches
that use vertical guidance provided by a Baro-VNAV
system. Because the Baro-VNAV guidance is advisory and
not primary, Baro-VNAV approaches are not authorized in
areas of hazardous terrain, nor are they authorized when
a remote altimeter setting is required. Due to the inherent
problems associated with barometric readings and cold
temperatures, these procedures are also temperature
limited. Additional approach design criteria for RNAV
Approach Construction Criteria can be found in the
appropriate FAA Order 8260-series orders.

Figure 4-37. RNAV approaches with and without TAAs.

RNAV (GPS) Approach Using WAAS
WAAS was commissioned in July 2003, with IOC. Although
precision approach capability is still in the future, WAAS
currently provides a type of APV known as LPV. WAAS can
support the following minima types: LPV, LNAV/VNAV,
LP, and LNAV. Approach minima as low as 200 feet HAT
and 1/2 SM visibility is possible, even though LPV is not
considered a precision approach. WAAS covers 95 percent
of the country 95 percent of the time.
Note: WAAS avionics receive an airworthiness approval
in accordance with Technical Standard Order (TSO)
C145, Airborne Navigation Sensors Using the Global
Positioning System (GPS) Augmented by the Satellite
Based Augmentation System (SBAS), or TSO-146, Stand-
Alone Airborne Navigation Equipment Using the Global
Positioning System (GPS) Augmented by the Satellite Based
Augmentation System (SBAS), and installed in accordance
with AC 20-138C, Airworthiness Approval of Positioning
and Navigation Systems.
Precision approach capability will become available as more
GBAS (LAAS) approach types become operational. GBAS
(LAAS) further increases the accuracy of GPS and improves
signal integrity warnings. Precision approach capability
requires obstruction planes and approach lighting systems
to meet Part 77 standards for ILS approaches. This delays
the implementation of RNAV (GPS) precision approach
capability due to the cost of certifying each runway.
ILS Approaches
Notwithstanding emerging RNAV technology, the ILS is the
most precise and accurate approach NAVAID currently in
use throughout the NAS. An ILS CAT I precision approach
allows approaches to be made to 200 feet above the TDZE
and with visibilities as low as 1,800 RVR; with CAT II and CAT
III approaches allowing descents and visibility minimums
that are even lower. Non-precision approach alternatives
cannot begin to offer the precision or flexibility offered by
an ILS. In order to further increase the approach capacity
of busy airports and exploit the maximum potential of ILS
technology, many different applications are in use.
An ILS system can accommodate up to 29 arrivals per hour
on a single runway. Two or three parallel runways operating
independently can double or triple the capacity of the
airport. For air commerce, this means greater flexibility
in scheduling passenger and cargo service. Capacity is
increased through the use of simultaneous or converging
ILS approaches, which are explained further in the
corresponding paragraphs below.
In order to successfully accomplish simultaneous or
converging ILS approaches, flight crews and ATC have
additional responsibilities. When simultaneous instrument
approaches are in use, ATC advises flight crews either
directly or through ATIS of the active runways. It is the
pilot’s responsibility to inform ATC if unable or unwilling
to execute a simultaneous approach. Pilots must comply
with all ATC requests in a timely manner and maintain
strict radio discipline, including using complete aircraft
call signs. It is also incumbent upon the flight crew to
notify ATC immediately of any problems relating to aircraft
communications or navigation systems. At the very least,
the approach procedure briefing should cover the entire
procedure including the approach name, runway number,
frequencies, final approach course, glideslope intercept
altitude, DA or DH, and the missed approach instructions.
The review of autopilot procedures is also appropriate
when making coupled ILS approaches.
As with all approaches, the primary navigation responsibility
falls upon the pilot in command. ATC instructions will be
limited to ensuring aircraft separation. Additionally, MAPs
are designed to diverge in order to protect all involved
aircraft. ILS approaches of all types are afforded the same
obstacle clearance protection and design criteria, no matter
how capacity is affected by simultaneous ILS approaches.
[Figure 4-40]
ILS Approach Categories
There are three general classifications of ILS approaches:
CAT I, CAT II, and CAT III (autoland). The basic ILS approach is
a CAT I approach and requires only that pilots be instrument
rated and current, and that the aircraft be equipped
appropriately. CAT II and CAT III ILS approaches have lower
minimums and require special certification for operators,
pilots, aircraft, and airborne/ground equipment. Because
of the complexity and high cost of the equipment, CAT III
ILS approaches are used primarily in air carrier and military
operations. [Figure 4-41]
CAT II and III Approaches
The primary authorization and minimum RVRs allowed
for an air carrier to conduct CAT II and III approaches
can be found in OpSpecs Part C. CAT II and III operations
allow authorized pilots to make instrument approaches in
weather that would otherwise be prohibitive.
While CAT I ILS operations permit substitution of midfield
RVR for TDZ RVR (when TDZ RVR is not available), CAT II ILS
operations do not permit any substitutions for TDZ RVR.
The TDZ RVR system is required and must be used. The TDZ
RVR is controlling for all CAT II ILS operations.

The weather conditions encountered in CAT III operations
range from an area where visual references are adequate for
manual rollout in CAT IIIa, to an area where visual references
are inadequate even for taxi operations in CAT IIIc. To
date, no U.S. operator has received approval for CAT IIIc
in OpSpecs. Depending on the auto-flight systems, some
aircraft require a DH to ensure that the aircraft is going to
land in the TDZ and some require an Alert Height as a final
cross-check of the performance of the auto-flight systems.
These heights are based on radio altitude (RA) and can be
found in the specific aircraft’s AFM. [Figure 4-42]
Both CAT II and III approaches require special ground and
airborne equipment to be installed and operational, as
well as special aircrew training and authorization. The
OpSpecs of individual air carriers detail the requirements
of these types of approaches, as well as their performance
criteria. Lists of locations where each operator is approved
to conduct CAT II and III approaches can also be found in
the OpSpecs.
Special Authorization approaches are designed to
take advantage of advances in flight deck avionics and
technologies like Head-Up Displays (HUD) and automatic
landings. There are extensive ground infrastructures and
lighting requirements for standard CAT II/III, and the
Special Authorization approaches mitigate the lack of some
lighting with the modern avionics found in many aircraft
today. Similar to standard CAT II/III, an air carrier must be
specifically authorized to conduct Special Authorization
CAT I/II in OpSpecs Part C.
Simultaneous Approaches To Parallel Runways
Airports that have two or more parallel runways may be
authorized to use simultaneous parallel approaches to
maximize the capacity of the airport. Depending on the
runway centerline separation and ATC procedures, there are
three classifications of simultaneous parallel approaches:
Simultaneous dependent approaches, simultaneous
independent approaches and simultaneous independent
close parallel approaches. A simultaneous dependent
approach differs from a simultaneous independent
approach in that the minimum distance between parallel
runway centerlines may be less. A staggered separation of
aircraft on the adjacent final approach course is required;
but there is no requirement for a No Transgression Zone
(NTZ) or Final Monitor Controllers. An independent
approach eliminates the need for staggered approaches
and aircraft may be side by side or pass if speeds are
different.
NOTE:
1. Simultaneous approaches involving an RNAV approach
may only be conducted when (GPS) appears in the
approach title or a chart note states that GPS is required.
See the “ILS Approaches” paragraph above for information
about pilot responsibilities when simultaneous approaches
are in use.
2. Flight Director or Autopilot requirements for simultaneous
operations will be annotated on the approach chart.
3. Simultaneous approaches may only be conducted
where instrument approach charts specifically authorize
simultaneous approaches.
Simultaneous Dependent Approaches [Figure
4-46]
When simultaneous dependent approaches are provided,
ATC applies specific minimum diagonal separation criteria,
depending on the runway separation, between aircraft on
adjacent final approach courses. Aircraft will be staggered
by a minimum of 1 NM diagonally on final, depending
on the distance between runway centerlines. Greater
separation standards are applied when the distance
between runway centerlines is greater. [Figure 4-43]
At some airports, simultaneous dependent instrument
approaches can be conducted with runways spaced less
than 2,500 feet with specific centerline separations and
threshold staggers. ATC is permitted to apply reduced
diagonal separation and special wake turbulence
procedures. The lead aircraft of the dependent pair is
restricted to being small or large aircraft weight type and is
cleared to the lower approach. The design of the approach,
aircraft weight type, and lateral separation between the two
approaches provide necessary wake turbulence avoidance
for this type of operation. An example of approach design
to help avoid wake turbulence is that some locations use
different glide slope angles on adjacent approaches; also,
if applicable, staggered thresholds help. An ATIS example
is: “Simultaneous ILS Runway 28 Left and ILS Runway 28
Right in use.” For further information, see FAA Orders JO
7110.65 and JO 7110.308.
Where a simultaneous approach operation is approved,
sometimes each approach chart indicates the other
runway(s) with which simultaneous approaches can be
conducted. For example, “Simultaneous approaches
authorized with runway 12L”. As procedures are revised,
the chart note will be modified to indicate “Simultaneous
approach authorized” but will not list the other runways or
approach types as that detailed information will normally
be transmitted in the ATIS or by ATC. For example, pilots
flying into Sacramento, California, may encounter parallel
approach procedures. [Figure 4-44] When there is no

chart note stating, “Simultaneous approaches authorized”,
standard separation is used between aircraft on parallel
approaches.
Simultaneous Independent Approaches
Dual and triple simultaneous independent parallel
instrument approaches, are authorized at certain airports
with specified distances between parallel runway centerlines.
As a part of the simultaneous independent approach
approval, an NTZ must be established to ensure proper flight
track boundaries for all aircraft. Outside of the NTZ, normal
operating zones (NOZ) indicate the operating zone within
which aircraft remain during normal approach operations.
The NOZ between the final approach courses varies in
width depending on the runway centerline spacing. The
NTZ is defined as a 2,000-foot wide area located equidistant
between the final approach courses in which flight is not
allowed during the simultaneous operation. [Figure 4-46]
Any time an aircraft breaches or is anticipated to breach the
NTZ, ATC issues instructions for the threatened aircraft on the
adjacent final approach course to break off the approach to
avoid potential conflict.
A local controller for each runway is also required. Dedicated
final monitor controllers for each runway monitor separation,
track aircraft positions and issue instructions to pilots of
aircraft observed deviating from the final approach course.
[Figure 4-45] These operations are normally authorized
for ILS, LDA and RNAV approach procedures with vertical
guidance. For simultaneous parallel ILS approach operations,
pilots should review the chart notes to determine whether
the non-precision LOC procedure is authorized (in the
event of glide slope equipment failure either in the aircraft
or the ground). An example of a restriction on the use of a
LOC procedure is shown in the notes on Figure 4-24: “LOC
procedure NA during simultaneous operations”. Likewise, for
RNAV (GPS) approaches, use of LNAV procedures are often
restricted during simultaneous operations.
Triple simultaneous independent approaches are authorized
provided the runway centerlines are separated by at least
3900 feet for triple straight in approaches. If one or both
outside runways have an offset approach course of 2.5°
to 3.0°, the spacing between those outer runways and the
center runway may be reduced to 3000 feet.
Simultaneous Close Parallel Precision Runway
Monitor (PRM) Approaches
Simultaneous close parallel (independent) PRM approaches
are authorized for use at designated airports that have
parallel runways spaced less than 4,300 feet apart.
[Figure 4-47] Certain PRM approaches are referred to as
Simultaneous Offset Instrument Approaches (SOIA) and
are discussed in depth later in this chapter.
PRM procedures are the most efficient method of increasing
approach capacity at airports with closely spaced, parallel
runways. Use of PRM procedures increases airport
capacity during periods of low visibility by providing
ATC the capability to monitor simultaneous close parallel
(independent) approaches. These PRM operations reduce
delays and increase fuel savings. Traditionally the PRM
system included a high-update rate radar, a high resolution
ATC radar display, as well as software that can autonomously
track aircraft in close to real time, with visual and aural alerts
that depict the aircraft’s current position and velocity as
well as displaying a ten-second projected position to the
controllers. Today, most PRM operations are conducted
without the need for high update rate radar, so long as all
of the other requirements to conduct such approaches
are met.
There are also special communications and ATC
requirements for PRM approaches. PRM approaches
require a final NTZ monitor controller for each runway, a
separate tower controller for each runway, a PRM tower
frequency, and a runway-specific PRM frequency. Each final
monitor controller will have a dedicated PRM frequency,
and the tower controller will have a separate common PRM
frequency. Pilots transmit and receive on the common
tower PRM frequency, but maintain listening watch on the
final controller’s PRM frequency for their specified runway.
The final monitor controller has override capability on
their PRM frequency. In that way, if the common tower
frequency is blocked, the monitor controller’s instructions
will be heard by the pilot on the monitor controller’s PRM
frequency. Pilot training is prescribed and required for
pilots prior to using the PRM procedures. The FAA PRM
website (http://www.faa.gov/training_testing/ training/
prm/) contains training information for PRM approaches
and hosts PRM training materials for download or viewing
online.”
When pilots or flight crews wish to decline a PRM approach,
ATC must be notified immediately and the flight will be
transitioned into the area at the convenience of ATC. Pilots
who are unable to accept a PRM approach may be subject
to delays.
The approach chart for the PRM approach requires review of
the accompanying AAUP page, which outlines pilot, aircraft,
and procedure requirements necessary to participate in
PRM operations. [Figure 4-48] Pilots need to be aware
of the differences associated with this type of approach.
Differences, as compared to other simultaneous approaches,
are listed below:
Immediately follow break out instructions as soon

as safety permits.
Use of the AAUP.
Use of dual VHF communications.
Completion of required PRM training.
Handflying any breakout instruction. It is important
to note that descending breakouts, though rare, may
be issued. Flight crews will never be issued breakout
instructions that clear them to an altitude below the
MVA, and they are not required to descend at more
than 1,000 fpm.
Traffic Alert and Collision Avoidance System (TCAS) is
not required to conduct a PRM approach. For aircraft
so equipped, if the controller’s climb/descend
instruction differs from the TCAS resolution advisory
(RA), pilots must follow the RA while continuing to
follow the controller’s turn instruction. Report this
deviation to ATC as soon as practical.
Simultaneous Offset Instrument Approaches
(SOIAs)
SOIAs allow simultaneous approaches to two parallel
runways spaced at least 750 feet apart, but less than 3,000
feet. Traditionally, the SOIA procedure has used an ILS/
PRM approach to one runway and an offset localizer-type
directional aid (LDA)/PRM approach with glideslope to
the adjacent runway. Now, RNAV (GPS) and RNAV (RNP)
approaches may also be used for SOIA.” Approach charts
will include procedural notes, such as “Simultaneous Close
Parallel approach authorized with LDA PRM RWY 28R and
RNAV (GPS) PRM X RWY 28R.” or “Simultaneous approach
authorized”. San Francisco had the first published SOIA
approach. [Figure 4-49]
The training, procedures, and system requirements for
SOIA ILS/PRM and LDA/PRM approaches are identical
with those used for simultaneous close parallel ILS/PRM
approaches until near the LDA/PRM approach MAP, where
visual acquisition of the ILS aircraft by the LDA aircraft must
be accomplished. If visual acquisition is not accomplished
prior to reaching the LDA MAP , a missed approach must
be executed. A visual segment for the LDA/PRM approach
is established between the LDA MAP and the runway
threshold. Aircraft transition in visual conditions from
the LDA course, beginning at the LDA MAP, to align with
the runway and can be stabilized by 500 feet AGL on the
extended runway centerline. Pilots are reminded that they
are responsible for collision avoidance and wake turbulence
mitigation between the LDA MAP and the runway.
The FAA website has additional information about PRM and
SOIA approaches, including an instructional PowerPoint
training presentation at http://www.faa.gov/training_
testing/training/prm/.
Converging ILS Approaches
Another method by which ILS approach capacity can be
increased is through the use of converging approaches.
Converging approaches may be established at airports
that have runways with an angle between 15° and 100°
and each runway must have an ILS. Additionally, separate
procedures must be established for each approach, and
each approach must have a MAP at least 3 NM apart with
no overlapping of the protected missed approach airspace.
Only straight-in approaches are approved for converging
ILS procedures. If the runways intersect, the controller must
be able to visually separate intersecting runway traffic.
Approaches to intersecting runways generally have higher
minimums, commonly with 600-foot ceiling and 1 1/4 to 2
mile visibility requirements. Pilots are informed of the use
of converging ILS approaches by the controller upon initial
contact or through ATIS. [Figure 4-50]
Dallas/Fort Worth International airport is one of the few
airports that makes use of converging ILS approaches
because its runway configuration has multiple parallel
runways and two offset runways. [Figure 4-51] The
approach chart title indicates the use of converging
approaches and the notes section highlights other runways
that are authorized for converging approach procedures.
Note the slight different in charting titles on the IAPs. Soon
all Converging ILS procedures will be charted in the newer
format shown in Figure 4-50, with the use of "V" in the title,
and "CONVERGING" in parenthesis.
VOR Approach
The VOR is one of the most widely used non-precision
approach types in the NAS. VOR approaches use VOR
facilities both on and off the airport to establish approaches
and include the use of a wide variety of equipment, such
as DME and TACAN. Due to the wide variety of options
included in a VOR approach, TERPS outlines design criteria
for both on and off airport VOR facilities, as well as VOR
approaches with and without a FAF. Despite the various
configurations, all VOR approaches are non-precision
approaches, require the presence of properly operating
VOR equipment, and can provide MDAs as low as 250 feet
above the runway. VOR also offers a flexible advantage in
that an approach can be made toward or away from the
navigational facility.
The VOR approach into Fort Rucker, Alabama, is an example
of a VOR approach where the VOR facility is on the airport
and there is no specified FAF. [Figure 4-52] For a straight-in

Figure 4-38. Traditional GPS approach overlay.

Figure 4-39. Lincoln Muni KLNK Lincoln, Nebraska, RNAV GPS RWY 14 approach.

approach, the final approach course is typically aligned
to intersect the extended runway centerline 3,000 feet
from the runway threshold, and the angle of convergence
between the two does not exceed 30°. This type of VOR
approach also includes a minimum of 300 feet of obstacle
clearance in the final approach area. The final approach
area criteria include a 2 NM wide primary area at the facility
that expands to 6 NM wide at a distance of 10 NM from
the facility. Additional approach criteria are established
for courses that require a high altitude teardrop approach
penetration.
When DME is included in the title of the VOR approach,
operable DME must be installed in the aircraft in order to
fly the approach from the FAF. The use of DME allows for an
accurate determination of position without timing, which
greatly increases situational awareness throughout the
approach. Alexandria, Louisiana, is an excellent example
of a VOR/DME approach in which the VOR is off the airport
and a FAF is depicted. [Figure 4-53] In this case, the final
approach course is a radial or straight-in final approach and
is designed to intersect the runway centerline at the runway
threshold with the angle of convergence not exceeding 30°.
The criteria for an arc final approach segment associated
with a VOR/DME approach is based on the arc being
beyond 7 NM and no farther than 30 NM from the VOR
and depends on the angle of convergence between the
runway centerline and the tangent of the arc. Obstacle
clearance in the primary area, which is considered the area
4 NM on either side of the arc centerline, is guaranteed by
at least 500 feet.
NDB Approach
Like the VOR approach, an NDB approach can be designed
using facilities both on and off the airport, with or without
a FAF, and with or without DME availability. At one time,
it was commonplace for an instrument student to learn
how to fly an NDB approach, but with the growing use of
GPS, many pilots no longer use the NDB for instrument
approaches. New RNAV approaches are also rapidly being
constructed into airports that are served only by NDB. The
long-term plan includes the gradual phase out of NDB
facilities, and eventually, the NDB approach becomes
nonexistent. Until that time, the NDB provides additional
availability for instrument pilots into many smaller, remotely
located airports.
The NDB Runway 35 approach at Carthage/Panola County
Sharpe Field is an example of an NDB approach established
with an on-airport NDB that does not incorporate a FAF.
[Figure 4-54] In this case, a procedure turn or penetration
turn is required to be a part of the approach design. For
the NDB to be considered an on-airport facility, the facility
must be located within one mile of any portion of the
landing runway for straight-in approaches and within one
mile of any portion of usable landing surface for circling
approaches. The final approach segment of the approach
is designed with a final approach area that is 2.5 NM wide
at the facility and increases to 8 NM wide at 10 NM from
the facility. Additionally, the final approach course and
the extended runway centerline angle of convergence
cannot exceed 30° for straight-in approaches. This type of
NDB approach is afforded a minimum of 350 feet obstacle
clearance.
When a FAF is established for an NDB approach, the
approach design criteria changes. It also takes into account
whether or not the NDB is located on or off the airport.
Additionally, this type of approach can be made both
moving toward or away from the NDB facility. The Tuscon
Ryan Field, NDB/DME RWY 6 is an approach with a FAF
using an on-airport NDB facility that also incorporates the
use of DME. [Figure 4-55] In this case, the NDB has DME
capabilities from the LOC approach system installed on the
airport. While the alignment criteria and obstacle clearance
remain the same as an NDB approach without a FAF, the
final approach segment area criteria changes to an area that
is 2.5 NM wide at the facility and increases to 5 NM wide,
15 NM from the NDB.
Radar Approaches
The two types of radar approaches available to pilots when
operating in the NAS are precision approach radar (PAR) and
airport surveillance radar (ASR). Radar approaches may be
given to any aircraft at the pilot’s request. ATC may also offer
radar approach options to aircraft in distress regardless of
the weather conditions or as necessary to expedite traffic.
Despite the control exercised by ATC in a radar approach
environment, it remains the pilot’s responsibility to ensure
the approach and landing minimums listed for the approach
are appropriate for the existing weather conditions
considering personal approach criteria certification and
company OpSpecs.
Perhaps the greatest benefit of either type of radar approach
is the ability to use radar to execute a no gyro approach.
Assuming standard rate turns, ATC can indicate when to
begin and end turns. If available, pilots should make use of
this approach when the heading indicator has failed and
partial panel instrument flying is required.
Information about radar approaches is published in tabular
form in the front of the TPP booklet. PAR, ASR, and circling
approach information including runway, DA, DH, or MDA,
height above airport (HAA), HAT, ceiling, and visibility criteria

Figure 4-40. ILS final approach segment design criteria.
CAT II
Runway visual range (feet)
1,200
1,800
2,400
Decision height (feet AGL)
CAT IIIc
CAT IIIb
CAT IIIa
CAT I
The lowest authorized ILS minimums, with all required ground and airborne systems components operative, are:
CAT I - decision height (DH) 200 feet and runway visual range
(RVR) 2,400 feet (with touchdown zone and centerline lighting.
RVR 1,800 feet).
CAT II - DH 100 feet and RVR 1,200 feet.
CAT IIIa - No DH or DH below 100 feet and RVR not less than
700 feet.
CAT IIIb - No DH or DH below 50 feet and RVR less than
700 feet but not less than 150 feet.
CAT IIIc - No DH and no RVR limitation.
NOTE: Special authorization and equipment are required
for CAT II and III.
Figure 4-41. ILS approach categories.

Figure 4-42. Category III approach procedure.

are outlined and listed by specific airport.
Regardless of the type of radar approach in use, ATC
monitors aircraft position and issues specific heading
and altitude information throughout the entire approach.
Particularly, lost communications procedures should
be briefed prior to execution to ensure pilots have a
comprehensive understanding of ATC expectations if radio
communication were lost. ATC also provides additional
information concerning weather and missed approach
instructions when beginning a radar approach. [Figure
4-56]
Precision Approach Radar (PAR)
PAR provides both vertical and lateral guidance, as well as
range, much like an ILS, making it the most precise radar
approach available. The radar approach, however, is not
able to provide visual approach indications in the flight
deck. This requires the flight crew to listen and comply
with controller instructions. PAR approaches are rare, with
most of the approaches used in a military setting; any
opportunity to practice this type of approach is beneficial
to any flight crew.
The final approach course of a PAR approach is normally
aligned with the runway centerline, and the associated
glideslope is typically no less than 2.5° and no more than
3°. Obstacle clearance for the final approach area is based
on the particular established glideslope angle and the
exact formula is outlined in FAA Order 8260.3. [Figure 4-57]
Airport Surveillance Radar (ASR)
ASR approaches are typically only approved when
necessitated for an ATC operational requirement or in an
unusual or emergency situation. This type of radar only
provides heading and range information, although the
controller can advise the pilot of the altitude where the
aircraft should be based on the distance from the runway.
An ASR approach procedure can be established at any radar
27L
27R
18L
18R
No transgression zone
23L
23R
No transgression zone
Simultaneous Dependent Approaches
• Runway centerlines spaced 2,500 feet or greater,
except for specific procedures approved with less
runway spacing
• Final monitor controller NOT required
Independent Parallel Approaches
Simultaneous Independent
Approaches
• Runway centerlines spaced 4,300
feet or greater (duals or triples)
• Final monitor controllers required
Simultaneous Independent Close
Parallel Approaches
• Runway centerlines spaced less than
4,300 feet (duals or triples)
• Final monitor controllers required
• “PRM” in the approach identification
• Staggered approaches (diagonal separation) with the
adjacent final approach course
• Standard radar separation between aircraft on the
same final approach course
Simultaneous Dependent Approach Separation
Diagonal separation
Standard separation
Figure 4-43. Classification of Simultaneous Parallel Approaches.

Figure 4-44. Sacramento International KSMF, Sacramento, California, ILS or LOC RWY 16L.

NOT FOR NAVIGATION
Note indicates simultaneous approaches are authorized.
(Authorization might include dependent or independent
and either duals or triples, depending on the ATC procedures
in use.)
Figure 4-45. Charlotte Douglas International KCLT, Charlotte, North Carolina, ILS or LOC RWY 18L.

facility that has an antenna within 20 NM of the airport
and meets the equipment requirements outlined in FAA
Order 8200.1, U.S. Standard Flight Inspection Manual. ASR
approaches are not authorized for use when Center Radar
ARTS processing (CENRAP) procedures are in use due to
diminished radar capability.
The final approach course for an ASR approach is aligned
with the runway centerline for straight-in approaches
and aligned with the center of the airport for circling
approaches. Within the final approach area, the pilot is also
guaranteed a minimum of 250 feet obstacle clearance. ASR
descent gradients are designed to be relatively flat, with an
optimal gradient of 150 feet per mile and never exceeding
300 feet per mile.
Localizer Approaches
As an approach system, the localizer is an extremely flexible
approach aid that, due to its inherent design, provides
many applications for a variety of needs in instrument
flying. An ILS glideslope installation may be impossible
due to surrounding terrain. The localizer is able to provide
four separate types of non-precision approaches from one
approach system:
Localizer approach
Localizer/DME approach
Localizer back course approach
Localizer-type directional aid (LDA)
Localizer and Localizer DME
The localizer approach system can provide both precision
and non-precision approach capabilities to a pilot. As a
part of the ILS system, the localizer provides horizontal
guidance for a precision approach. Typically, when the
localizer is discussed, it is thought of as a non-precision
approach due to the fact that either it is the only approach
system installed, or the glideslope is out of service on the
ILS. In either case, the localizer provides a non-precision
approach using a localizer transmitter installed at a specific
airport. [Figure 4-58]
TERPS provides the same alignment criteria for a localizer
approach as it does for the ILS, since it is essentially the
12R
12L
3,200'
2,200'
2,200'
3,200'
NO TRANSGRESSION ZONE (NTZ)
Radar monitoring provided to ensure
separation during simultaneous
approaches. A breakout will be
directed if an aircraft enters the NTZ.
Intercept glideslope at 2,200 feet
Intercept glideslope at 3,200 feet
Radar monitoring provided to ensure
separation during simultaneous
approaches. A breakout will be
directed if an aircraft enters the NTZ.
Independent approaches to runway
centerlines spaced 4,300 feet or more
—radar monitoring required.
Normal Operating Zone (NOZ)
Figure 4-46. Simultaneous Independent Approach Example Using ILS Approaches.

NO TRANSGRESSION ZONE (NTZ)
26L
8R
26R
8L
Intercept glideslope at 3,200 feet. NTZ begins
where there is less than standard separation.
Radar monitoring provided to ensure
separation during simultaneous
approaches. A breakout will be
directed if an aircraft enters the NTZ.
Radar monitoring provided to ensure
separation during simultaneous
approaches. A breakout will be
directed if an aircraft enters the NTZ.
Standard lateral or vertical separation
between aircraft on parallel localizers
prior to the beginning of the NTZ.
Runway centerlines spaced less than
4,300 feet apart, radar monitoring and
PRM procedures required
3,200 feet
2,200 feet
Intercept glideslope at 2,200 feet
Normal Operating Zone (NOZ)
Figure 4-47. Simultaneous independent close parallel approach example using ILS PRM approaches.
same approach without vertical guidance stemming from
the glideslope. A localizer is always aligned within 3° of the
runway, and it is afforded a minimum of 250 feet obstacle
clearance in the final approach area. In the case of a
localizer DME (LOC DME) approach, the localizer installation
has a collocated DME installation that provides distance
information required for the approach. [Figure 4-59]
Localizer Back Course
In cases where an ILS is installed, a back course may be
available in conjunction with the localizer. Like the localizer,
the back course does not offer a glideslope, but remember
that the back course can project a false glideslope signal
and the glideslope should be ignored. Reverse sensing
occurs on the back course using standard VOR equipment.
With a horizontal situation indicator (HSI) system, reverse
sensing is eliminated if it is set appropriately to the front
course. [Figure 4-60]
Localizer-Type Directional Aid (LDA)
The LDA is of comparable use and accuracy to a localizer
but is not part of a complete ILS. The LDA course usually
provides a more precise approach course than the similar
simplified directional facility (SDF) installation, which may
have a course width of 6° or 12°.
The LDA is not aligned with the runway. Straight-in
minimums may be published where alignment does
not exceed 30° between the course and runway. Circling
minimums only are published where this alignment
exceeds 30°.

Specifies dual VHF and additional information
Pilots who are unable to participate will be afforded appropriate arrival services as operational conditions permit
and must notify the controlling ATC facility as soon as practical, but at least 100 miles from destination.
ILS PRM Rwys 8L, 9R, 9L, 10, 26R, 27L, 27R, 28
ILS PRM Rwys 8L (SA CAT I, CAT II-III), 9R (SA-CAT I, CAT II-III), 10 (SA CAT I, CAT II-III), 27L (SA CAT-I, CAT II),
28 (SA-CAT I, CAT II), 26R (SA-CAT I-II), 28 (CAT-II)
RNAV (GPS) PRM Y Rwys 8L, 26R, 10, 28
RNAV (GPS) PRM Rwys 8R, 9L, 9R, 26L, 27L, 27R
General
- Review the company procedure for executing a climbing and descending PRM breakout
- Breakout phraseology: “Traffic alert (call sign) turn (L/R) immediately climb/descend and maintain (altitude).”
- All breakouts: Hand flown, initiate immediately.
- Descending on the glideslope/glidepath ensures compliance with any charted crossing restrictions.
-
Dual VHF Comm.: When assigned or planning a specific PRM approach, tune a second receiver to the PRM monitor
frequency or, if silent, another active frequency (i.e., ATIS), set the volume, retune the PRM frequency if
necessary, then deselect the audio. When directed by ATC, immediately switch to the tower frequency and select
the second receiver audio to ON.
- If later assigned the same runway, non-PRM approach, consider it briefed provided the same minimums are utilized.
PRM related chart notes and PRM frequency no longer apply.
- TCAS during breakout: Follow TCAS climb/descend if it differs from ATC, while executing the breakout turn.
NOT FOR NAVIGATION
Figure 4-48. Example of Simultaneous close parallel instrument approach: Atlanta, Georgia, ILS PRM RWY 10 and AAUP.

A very limited number of LDA approaches also incorporate
a glideslope. These are annotated in the plan view of the
instrument approach chart with a note, “LDA/Glideslope.”
These procedures fall under a newly defined category of
approaches called Approach (Procedure) with Vertical
Guidance (aviation) APVs. LDA minima for with and without
glideslope is provided and annotated on the minima lines
of the approach chart as S−LDA/GS and S−LDA. Because
the final approach course is not aligned with the runway
centerline, additional maneuvering is required compared
to an ILS approach. [Figure 4-61]
Simplified Directional Facility (SDF)
The SDF provides a final approach course similar to that of
the ILS localizer. It does not provide glideslope information.
A clear understanding of the ILS localizer and the additional
factors listed below completely describe the operational
characteristics and use of the SDF. [Figure 4-62]
The approach techniques and procedures used in an SDF
instrument approach are essentially the same as those
employed in executing a standard localizer approach
except the SDF course may not be aligned with the runway
and the course may be wider, resulting in less precision.
Like the LOC type approaches, the SDF is an alternative
approach that may be installed at an airport for a variety
of reasons, including terrain. The final approach is provided
a minimum of 250 feet obstacle clearance for straight-in
approaches while in the final approach area, which is an
area defined for a 6° course: 1,000 feet at or abeam the
runway threshold expanding to 19,228 feet (10 NM) from
the threshold. The same final approach area for a 12°
course is larger. This type of approach is also designed with
a maximum descent gradient of 400 feet per NM, unless
circling only minimums are authorized.

Figure 4-49. Example of Approach and AAUP used for Simultaneous Offset Instrument Approach Procedure.

NOT FOR NAVIGATION
SW-2, 16 DEC 2010 to 13 JAN 2011
SW-2, 16 DEC 2010 to 13 JAN 2011
SW-2, 16 DEC 2010 to 13 JAN 2011
SW-2, 16 DEC 2010 to 13 JAN 2011
Figure 4-50. Converging approach criteria.

Indicates runways authorized for converging approach operations
SC-2, 08 JAN 2015 to 05 FEB 2015
SC-2, 08 JAN 2015 to 05 FEB 2015
Figure 4-51. Dallas-Fort Worth KDFW, Dallas-Fort Worth, Texas, CONVERGING ILS RWY 35C.

NOT FOR NAVIGATION
On-airport VOR facility
SE-4, 16 DEC 2010 to 13 JAN 2011
Figure 4-52. Fort Rucker, Alabama, KOZR VOR RWY 6.
SE-4, 16 DEC 2010 to 13 JAN 2011

Figure 4-53. Alexandria International (AEX), Alexandria, Louisiana, KAEX VOR DME RWY 32.

SC-2, 16 DEC 2010 to 13 JAN 2011
SC-2, 16 DEC 2010 to 13 JAN 2011
NOT FOR NAVIGATION
On-airport NDB facility
Figure 4-54. Carthage/Panola County-Sharpe Field, Carthage, Texas, (K4F2), NDB RWY 35.

NOT FOR NAVIGATION
SW-4, 16 DEC 2010 to 13 JAN 2011
On-airport NDB facility
NDB/DME FAF
FAF
SW-4, 16 DEC 2010 to 13 JAN 2011
Figure 4-55. Tucson/Ryan Field, Tuscson, Arizona, (KRYN), NDB/DME or GPS RWY 6R.

RADAR -1 118.45 292.125
NA
RADAR MINS
ASHEVILLE, NC
V
E
L
E
)
A
A
F
(
,8
V
O
N
,
A
.t
d
m
A
ASHEVILLE RGNL
RADAR - 124.65 269.575
/
T
A
H
/
T
A
H
DA/
HATh/
DA/
HATh/
RWY GS/TCH/RPI
CAT
MDA-VIS
HAA
CEIL-VIS
CAT MDA-VIS HAA CEIL-VIS
ASR
AB
660 (700-½)
C
660 (700-1¼)
D
2800 -1½ 660 (700-1½)
A
835 (900-1)
B
835 (900-1¼)
C
3000 -2½ 835 (900-2½)
D
3000 -2¾ 835 (900-2¾)
A
G
N
I
L
C
R
I
C
835 (900-1)
B
3000 -1¼ 835 (900-1¼)
C
3000 -2½ 835 (900-2½)
D
3000 -2¾ 835 (900-2¾)
Circling not authorized west of Rwy 16-34. Night circling not authorized.
BEAUFORT, SC
V
E
L
E
)
A
A
F
(
,0
V
O
N
,
A
.t
d
m
A
BEAUFORT COUNTY
NOT FOR NAVIGATION
RADAR INSTRUMENT APPROACH MINIMUMS
Figure 4-56. Asheville Regional KAVL, Asheville, North Carolina, radar instrument approach minimums.
Figure 4-57. PAR final approach area criteria.

Figure 4-58. Vicksburg Tallulah Regional KTVR, Tallulah Vicksburg, Louisiana, LOC RWY 36.

Figure 4-59. Vicksburg Tallulah Regional KTVR, Tallulah Vicksburg, Louisiana, LOC RWY 36.

Figure 4-60. Dayton Beach International DAB, Dayton Beach, Florida, LOC BC RWY 25R.

Figure 4-61. Hartford Brainard KHFD, Hartford, Connecticut, LDA RWY 2.

Figure 4-62. Lebanon Floyd W Jones, Lebanon, Missouri, SDF RWY 36.