Chapter 14
Airport
Iparetene
Operations
}
Introduction
Each time a pilot operates an aircraft, the flight normally
begins and ends at an airport. An airport may be a small sod
field or a large complex utilized by air carriers. This chapter
examines airport operations, identifies features of an airport
complex, and provides information on operating on or in the
vicinity of an airport.
Airport Categories
The definition for airports refers to any area of land or water
used or intended for landing or takeoff of aircraft. This
includes, within the five categories of airports listed below,
special types of facilities including seaplane bases, heliports,
and facilities to accommodate tilt rotor aircraft. An airport
includes an area used or intended for airport buildings,
facilities, as well as rights of way together with the buildings
and facilities.
14-1

The law defines airports by categories of airport activities,
including commercial service, primary, cargo service,
reliever, and general aviation airports, as shown below:
•
Commercial Service Airports—publicly owned
airports that have at least 2,500 passenger boardings
each calendar year and receive scheduled passenger
service. Passenger boardings refer to revenue passenger
boardings on an aircraft in service in air commerce
whether or not in scheduled service. The definition
also includes passengers who continue on an aircraft
in international flight that stops at an airport in any of
the 50 States for a non-traffic purpose, such as refueling
or aircraft maintenance rather than passenger activity.
Passenger boardings at airports that receive scheduled
passenger service are also referred to as Enplanements.
•
Cargo Service Airports—airports that, in addition to any
other air transportation services that may be available,
are served by aircraft providing air transportation of
only cargo with a total annual landed weight of more
than 100 million pounds. “Landed weight” means the
weight of aircraft transporting only cargo in intrastate,
interstate, and foreign air transportation. An airport
may be both a commercial service and a cargo service
airport.
•
Reliever Airports—airports designated by the FAA
to relieve congestion at Commercial Service Airports
and to provide improved general aviation access to the
overall community. These may be publicly or privately-
owned.
•
General Aviation Airports — the remaining airports
are commonly described as General Aviation Airports.
This airport type is the largest single group of airports
in the U.S. system. The category also includes privately
owned, public use airports that enplane 2500 or more
passengers annually and receive scheduled airline
service.
Types of Airports
There are two types of airports—towered and nontowered.
These types can be further subdivided to:
•
Civil Airports—airports that are open to the general
public.
•
Military/Federal Government airports—airports
operated by the military, National Aeronautics and
Space Administration (NASA), or other agencies of
the Federal Government.
•
Private Airports—airports designated for private or
restricted use only, not open to the general public.
14-2
Towered Airport
A towered airport has an operating control tower. Air traffic
control (ATC) is responsible for providing the safe, orderly,
and expeditious flow of air traffic at airports where the
type of operations and/or volume of traffic requires such a
service. Pilots operating from a towered airport are required
to maintain two-way radio communication with ATC and to
acknowledge and comply with their instructions. Pilots must
advise ATC if they cannot comply with the instructions issued
and request amended instructions. A pilot may deviate from
an air traffic instruction in an emergency, but must advise
ATC of the deviation as soon as possible.
Nontowered Airport
A nontowered airport does not have an operating control
tower. Two-way radio communications are not required,
although it is a good operating practice for pilots to transmit
their intentions on the specified frequency for the benefit
of other traffic in the area. The key to communicating at an
airport without an operating control tower is selection of the
correct common frequency. The acronym CTAF, which stands
for Common Traffic Advisory Frequency, is synonymous
with this program. A CTAF is a frequency designated for
the purpose of carrying out airport advisory practices while
operating to or from an airport without an operating control
tower. The CTAF may be a Universal Integrated Community
(UNICOM), MULTICOM, Flight Service Station (FSS), or
tower frequency and is identified in appropriate aeronautical
publications. UNICOM is a nongovernment air/ground radio
communication station that may provide airport information
at public use airports where there is no tower or FSS. On pilot
request, UNICOM stations may provide pilots with weather
information, wind direction, the recommended runway, or
other necessary information. If the UNICOM frequency
is designated as the CTAF, it is identified in appropriate
aeronautical publications. Figure 14-1 lists recommended
communication procedures. More information regarding
radio communications is provided later in this chapter.
Nontowered airport traffic patterns are always entered at
pattern altitude. How you enter the pattern depends upon the
direction of arrival. The preferred method for entering from
the downwind side of the pattern is to approach the pattern
on a course 45 degrees to the downwind leg and join the
pattern at midfield.
There are several ways to enter the pattern if you’re coming
from the upwind leg side of the airport. One method of entry
from the opposite side of the pattern is to announce your
intentions and cross over midfield at least 500 feet above