Aircraft systems
Navigation instruments and systems
Attitude instrument flying
Fundamental instrument skills
Basic flight maneuvers
Flight Training
Aircraft and instrument preflight inspection
Checklist procedures
Radio communications
Attitude instrument flying
Fundamental instrument skills
Basic flight maneuvers
Spatial disorientation
Navigation
Postflight procedures
Lesson 5—Aerodynamic factors and
basic flight maneuvers
Ground Training
Basic aerodynamic factors
Basic instrument flight patterns
Emergency procedures
Flight Training
Aircraft and instrument preflight inspection
Checklist procedures
Radio communications
Basic instrument flight patterns
Emergency procedures
Navigation
Postflight procedures
Lesson 6—Partial panel operations
Ground Training
ATC system
Flight instruments
Partial panel operations
Flight Training
Aircraft and instrument preflight inspection
Checklist procedures
Radio communications
Basic instrument flight patterns
Emergency procedures
Partial panel practice
Navigation
Postflight procedures
Lesson 7—Recovery from unusual
attitudes
Ground Training
Attitude instrument flying
ATC system
NAS overview
Flight Training
Preflight
Aircraft and instrument preflight inspection
Checklist procedures
Radio communications
Instrument takeoff
Navigation
Partial panel practice
Recovery from unusual attitudes
Postflight procedures
Lesson 8—Navigation systems
Ground Training
ATC clearances
Departure procedures
IFR en route charts
Flight Training
Aircraft and instrument preflight inspection
Checklist procedures
Radio communications
Intercepting and tracking
Holding
Postflight procedures
Lesson 9—Review and practice
Ground Training
Aerodynamic factors
Flight instruments and systems
Attitude instrument flying
Navigation systems
NAS
ATC
Emergency procedures
Flight Training
Aircraft and instrument preflight inspection
Checklist procedures
Radio communications
Review and practice as determined by the flight instructor

Instrument takeoff
Radio communications
Navigation systems
Emergency procedures
Postflight procedures
Lessons 10 through 19—Orientation,
intercepting, tracking, and holding using
each navigation system installed in the
aircraft
Ground Training
Preflight planning
Navigation systems
NAS
ATC
Emergencies
Flight Training
Aircraft and instrument preflight inspection
Checklist procedures
Radio communications
Departure procedures
En route navigation
Terminal operations
Partial panel operation
Instrument approach
Missed approach
Approach to a landing
Postflight procedures
Lessons 20 and 21—Cross-country
flights
Ground Training
Preflight planning
Aircraft performance
Navigation systems
NAS
ATC
Emergencies
Flight Training
Emergency procedures
Partial panel operation
Aircraft and instrument preflight inspection
Checklist procedures
Radio communications
Departure procedures
En route navigation
Terminal operations
Instrument approach
Missed approach
Approach to a landing
Postflight procedures
Lessons 22 and 23—Review and practice
Ground Training
Human factors
Aerodynamic factors
Flight instruments and systems
Attitude instrument flying
Basic flight maneuvers
Navigation systems
NAS
ATC
Emergency operations
Flight Training
Aircraft and instrument preflight inspection
Checklist procedures
Radio communications
Review and practice as determined by the flight instructor
Instrument takeoff
Partial panel operations
Unusual attitude recoveries
Radio communications
Navigation systems
Emergency procedures
Postflight procedures
Lessons 24 and subsequent—Practical
test preparation
Ground Training
Title 14 of the Code of Federal Regulations (14 CFR) parts
61, 71, 91, 95, and 97
Instrument Flying Handbook
Practical test standards
Administrative requirements
Equipment requirements
Applicant’s requirements
Flight Training
Review and practice until the student can consistently
perform all required tasks in accordance with the appropriate
practical test standards.
NOTE: It is the recommending instructor’s responsibility to
ensure that the applicant meets 14 CFR part 61 requirements
and is prepared for the practical test, including: training,
knowledge, experience, and the appropriate instructor
endorsements.

Absolute accuracy. The ability to determine present position
in space independently, and is most often used by pilots.
Absolute altitude. The actual distance between an aircraft
and the terrain over which it is flying.
Absolute pressure. Pressure measured from the reference
of zero pressure, or a vacuum.
A.C. Alternating current.
Acceleration error. A magnetic compass error apparent when
the aircraft accelerates while flying on an easterly or westerly
heading, causing the compass card to rotate toward North.
Accelerometer. A part of an inertial navigation system
(INS) that accurately measures the force of acceleration in
one direction.
ADF. See automatic direction finder.
ADI. See attitude director indicator.
ADM. See aeronautical decision-making.
ADS–B. See automatic dependent surveillance–broadcast.
Adverse yaw. A flight condition at the beginning of a turn in
which the nose of the aircraft starts to move in the direction
opposite the direction the turn is being made, caused by the
induced drag produced by the downward-deflected aileron
holding back the wing as it begins to rise.
Aeronautical decision-making (ADM). A systematic
approach to the mental process used by pilots to consistently
determine the best course of action in response to a given
set of circumstances.
A/FD. See Airport/Facility Directory.
Glossary
Agonic line. An irregular imaginary line across the surface of
the Earth along which the magnetic and geographic poles are in
alignment, and along which there is no magnetic variation.
Aircraft approach category. A performance grouping of
aircraft based on a speed of 1.3 times the stall speed in the
landing configuration at maximum gross landing weight.
Air data computer (ADC). An aircraft computer that
receives and processes pitot pressure, static pressure, and
temperature to calculate very precise altitude, indicated
airspeed, true airspeed, and air temperature.
AIRMET. Inflight weather advisory issued as an amendment
to the area forecast, concerning weather phenomena of
operational interest to all aircraft and that is potentially
hazardous to aircraft with limited capability due to lack of
equipment, instrumentation, or pilot qualifications.
Airport diagram. The section of an instrument approach
procedure chart that shows a detailed diagram of the
airport. This diagram includes surface features and airport
configuration information.
Airport/Facility Directory (A/FD). An FAA publication
containing information on all airports, communications,
and NAVAIDs.
Airport surface detection equipment (ASDE). Radar
equipment specifically designed to detect all principal
features and traffic on the surface of an airport, presenting the
entire image on the control tower console; used to augment
visual observation by tower personnel of aircraft and/or
vehicular movements on runways and taxiways.
Airport surveillance radar (ASR). Approach control
radar used to detect and display an aircraft’s position in the
terminal area.

Airport surveillance radar approach. An instrument
approach in which ATC issues instructions for pilot
compliance based on aircraft position in relation to the final
approach course and the distance from the end of the runway
as displayed on the controller’s radar scope.
Air route surveillance radar (ARSR). Air route traffic
control center (ARTCC) radar used primarily to detect
and display an aircraft’s position while en route between
terminal areas.
Air route traffic control center (ARTCC). Provides ATC
service to aircraft operating on IFR flight plans within
controlled airspace and principally during the en route phase
of flight.
Airspeed indicator. A differential pressure gauge that
measures the dynamic pressure of the air through which the
aircraft is flying. Displays the craft’s airspeed, typically in
knots, to the pilot.
Air traffic control radar beacon system (ATCRBS).
Sometimes called secondary surveillance radar (SSR), which
utilizes a transponder in the aircraft. The ground equipment is
an interrogating unit, in which the beacon antenna is mounted
so it rotates with the surveillance antenna. The interrogating
unit transmits a coded pulse sequence that actuates the aircraft
transponder. The transponder answers the coded sequence by
transmitting a preselected coded sequence back to the ground
equipment, providing a strong return signal and positive
aircraft identification, as well as other special data.
Airway. An airway is based on a centerline that extends from
one navigation aid or intersection to another navigation aid
(or through several navigation aids or intersections); used
to establish a known route for en route procedures between
terminal areas.
Alert area. An area in which there is a high volume of pilot
training or an unusual type of aeronautical activity.
Almanac data. Information the global positioning system
(GPS) receiver can obtain from one satellite which describes
the approximate orbital positioning of all satellites in the
constellation. This information is necessary for the GPS
receiver to know what satellites to look for in the sky at a
given time.
ALS. See approach lighting system.
Alternate airport. An airport designated in an IFR flight
plan, providing a suitable destination if a landing at the
intended airport becomes inadvisable.
Alternate static source valve. A valve in the instrument static
air system that supplies reference air pressure to the altimeter,
airspeed indicator, and vertical speed indicator if the normal
static pickup should become clogged or iced over.
Altimeter setting. Station pressure (the barometric pressure
at the location the reading is taken) which has been corrected
for the height of the station above sea level.
AME. See aviation medical examiner.
Amendment status. The circulation date and revision
number of an instrument approach procedure, printed above
the procedure identification.
Ammeter. An instrument installed in series with an electrical
load used to measure the amount of current flowing through
the load.
Aneroid. The sensitive component in an altimeter or
barometer that measures the absolute pressure of the air.
It is a sealed, flat capsule made of thin disks of corrugated
metal soldered together and evacuated by pumping all of
the air out of it.
Aneroid barometer. An instrument that measures the
absolute pressure of the atmosphere by balancing the weight
of the air above it against the spring action of the aneroid.
Angle of attack. The acute angle formed between the
chord line of an airfoil and the direction of the air striking
the airfoil.
Anti-ice. Preventing the accumulation of ice on an aircraft
structure via a system designed for that purpose.
Approach lighting system (ALS). Provides lights that will
penetrate the atmosphere far enough from touchdown to give
directional, distance, and glide path information for safe
transition from instrument to visual flight.
Area chart. Part of the low-altitude en route chart series,
this chart furnishes terminal data at a larger scale for
congested areas.
Area navigation (RNAV). Allows a pilot to fly a selected
course to a predetermined point without the need to overfly
ground-based navigation facilities, by using waypoints.
ARSR. See air route surveillance radar.
ARTCC. See air route traffic control center.

ASDE. See airport surface detection equipment.
ASOS. See automated surface observing station.
ASR. See airport surveillance radar.
ATC. Air Traffic Control.
ATCRBS. See air traffic control radar beacon system.
ATIS. See automatic terminal information service.
Atmospheric propagation delay. A bending of the
electromagnetic (EM) wave from the satellite that creates
an error in the GPS system.
Attitude and heading reference systems (AHRS). System
composed of three-axis sensors that provide heading, attitude,
and yaw information for aircraft. AHRS are designed to
replace traditional mechanical gyroscopic flight instruments
and provide superior reliability and accuracy.
Attitude director indicator (ADI). An aircraft attitude
indicator that incorporates flight command bars to provide
pitch and roll commands.
Attitude indicator. The foundation for all instrument flight,
this instrument reflects the airplane’s attitude in relation to
the horizon.
Attitude instrument flying. Controlling the aircraft by
reference to the instruments rather than by outside visual
cues.
Autokinesis. Nighttime visual illusion that a stationary light
is moving, which becomes apparent after several seconds of
staring at the light.
Automated Weather Observing System (AWOS).
Automated weather reporting system consisting of various
sensors, a processor, a computer-generated voice subsystem,
and a transmitter to broadcast weather data.
Automated Surface Observing Station (ASOS). Weather
reporting system which provides surface observations every
minute via digitized voice broadcasts and printed reports.
Automatic dependent surveillance–broadcast (ADS-B). A
device used in aircraft that repeatedly broadcasts a message
that includes position (such as latitude, longitude, and
altitude), velocity, and possibly other information.
Automatic direction finder (ADF). Electronic navigation
equipment that operates in the low- and medium-frequency
bands. Used in conjunction with the ground-based
nondirectional beacon (NDB), the instrument displays the
number of degrees clockwise from the nose of the aircraft
to the station being received.
Automatic terminal information service (ATIS). The
continuous broadcast of recorded non-control information in
selected terminal areas. Its purpose is to improve controller
effectiveness and relieve frequency congestion by automating
repetitive transmission of essential but routine information.
Aviation medical examiner (AME). A physician with
training in aviation medicine designated by the Civil
Aerospace Medical Institute (CAMI).
AWOS. See automated weather observing system.
Azimuth card. A card that may be set, gyroscopically
controlled, or driven by a remote compass.
Back course (BC). The reciprocal of the localizer course
for an ILS. When flying a back-course approach, an aircraft
approaches the instrument runway from the end at which the
localizer antennas are installed.
Baro-aiding. A method of augmenting the GPS integrity
solution by using a non-satellite input source. To ensure that
baro-aiding is available, the current altimeter setting must
be entered as described in the operating manual.
Barometric scale. A scale on the dial of an altimeter to which
the pilot sets the barometric pressure level from which the
altitude shown by the pointers is measured.
BC. See back course.
Block altitude. A block of altitudes assigned by ATC to
allow altitude deviations; for example, “Maintain block
altitude 9 to 11 thousand.”
Cage. The black markings on the ball instrument indicating
its neutral position.
Calibrated. The instrument indication compared with a
standard value to determine the accuracy of the instrument.
Calibrated orifice. A hole of specific diameter used to delay
the pressure change in the case of a vertical speed indicator.

Calibrated airspeed. The speed at which the aircraft
is moving through the air, found by correcting IAS for
instrument and position errors.
CAS. Calibrated airspeed.
CDI. Course deviation indicator.
Changeover point (COP). A point along the route or
airway segment between two adjacent navigation facilities
or waypoints where changeover in navigation guidance
should occur.
Circling approach. A maneuver initiated by the pilot to
align the aircraft with a runway for landing when a straight-
in landing from an instrument approach is not possible or is
not desirable.
Class A airspace. Airspace from 18,000 feet MSL up to and
including FL 600, including the airspace overlying the waters
within 12 NM of the coast of the 48 contiguous states and
Alaska; and designated international airspace beyond 12 NM
of the coast of the 48 contiguous states and Alaska within areas
of domestic radio navigational signal or ATC radar coverage,
and within which domestic procedures are applied.
Class B airspace. Airspace from the surface to 10,000 feet
MSL surrounding the nation’s busiest airports in terms of
IFR operations or passenger numbers. The configuration of
each Class B airspace is individually tailored and consists
of a surface area and two or more layers, and is designed to
contain all published instrument procedures once an aircraft
enters the airspace. For all aircraft, an ATC clearance is
required to operate in the area, and aircraft so cleared receive
separation services within the airspace.
Class C airspace. Airspace from the surface to 4,000 feet
above the airport elevation (charted in MSL) surrounding
those airports having an operational control tower, serviced
by radar approach control, and having a certain number of IFR
operations or passenger numbers. Although the configuration
of each Class C airspace area is individually tailored, the
airspace usually consists of a 5 NM radius core surface area
that extends from the surface up to 4,000 feet above the airport
elevation, and a 10 NM radius shelf area that extends from
1,200 feet to 4,000 feet above the airport elevation.
Class D airspace. Airspace from the surface to 2,500 feet
above the airport elevation (charted in MSL) surrounding
those airports that have an operational control tower. The
configuration of each Class D airspace area is individually
tailored, and when instrument procedures are published, the
airspace is normally designed to contain the procedures.
Class E airspace. Airspace that is not Class A, Class B, Class
C, or Class D, and is controlled airspace.
Class G airspace. Airspace that is uncontrolled, except
when associated with a temporary control tower, and has
not been designated as Class A, Class B, Class C, Class D,
or Class E airspace.
Clean configuration. A configuration in which all flight
control surfaces have been placed to create minimum drag.
In most aircraft this means flaps and gear retracted.
Clearance. ATC permission for an aircraft to proceed under
specified traffic conditions within controlled airspace, for the
purpose of providing separation between known aircraft.
Clearance delivery. Control tower position responsible for
transmitting departure clearances to IFR flights.
Clearance limit. The fix, point, or location to which an
aircraft is cleared when issued an air traffic clearance.
Clearance on request. An IFR clearance not yet received
after filing a flight plan.
Clearance void time. Used by ATC, the time at which the
departure clearance is automatically canceled if takeoff has
not been made. The pilot must obtain a new clearance or
cancel the IFR flight plan if not off by the specified time.
Clear ice. Glossy, clear, or translucent ice formed by the
relatively slow freezing of large, supercooled water droplets.
Compass course. A true course corrected for variation and
deviation errors.
Compass locator. A low-power, low- or medium-frequency
(L/MF) radio beacon installed at the site of the outer or middle
marker of an ILS.
Compass rose. A small circle graduated in 360° increments,
printed on navigational charts to show the amount of
compass variation at different locations, or on instruments
to indicate direction.
Computer navigation fix. A point used to define a
navigation track for an airborne computer system such as
GPS or FMS.
Concentric rings. Dashed-line circles depicted in the plan
view of IAP charts, outside of the reference circle, that show
en route and feeder facilities.

Cone of confusion. A cone-shaped volume of airspace
directly above a VOR station where no signal is received,
causing the CDI to fluctuate.
Control and performance. A method of attitude instrument
flying in which one instrument is used for making attitude
changes, and the other instruments are used to monitor the
progress of the change.
Control display unit. A display interfaced with the master
computer, providing the pilot with a single control point
for all navigations systems, thereby reducing the number of
required flight deck panels.
Controlled airspace. An airspace of defined dimensions
within which ATC service is provided to IFR and VFR flights
in accordance with the airspace classification. It includes
Class A, Class B, Class C, Class D, and Class E airspace.
Control pressures. The amount of physical exertion on the
control column necessary to achieve the desired attitude.
Convective weather. Unstable, rising air found in
cumiliform clouds.
Convective SIGMET. Weather advisory concerning
convective weather significant to the safety of all aircraft,
including thunderstorms, hail, and tornadoes.
Coordinated flight. Flight with a minimum disturbance of
the forces maintaining equilibrium, established via effective
control use.
COP. See changeover point.
Coriolis illusion. The illusion of rotation or movement in an
entirely different axis, caused by an abrupt head movement,
while in a prolonged constant rate turn that has ceased
stimulating the brain’s motion sensing system.
Crew resource management (CRM). The effective
use of all available resources—human, hardware, and
information.
Critical areas. Areas where disturbances to the ILS localizer
and glide slope courses may occur when surface vehicles or
aircraft operate near the localizer or glide slope antennas.
CRM. See crew resource management.
Cross-check. The first fundamental skill of instrument flight,
also known as “scan,” the continuous and logical observation
of instruments for attitude and performance information.
Cruise clearance. An ATC clearance issued to allow a
pilot to conduct flight at any altitude from the minimum
IFR altitude up to and including the altitude specified in the
clearance. Also authorizes a pilot to proceed to and make an
approach at the destination airport.
Current induction. An electrical current being induced into,
or generated in, any conductor that is crossed by lines of flux
from any magnet.
DA. See decision altitude.
D.C. Direct current.
Dark adaptation. Physical and chemical adjustments of the
eye that make vision possible in relative darkness.
Deceleration error. A magnetic compass error that occurs
when the aircraft decelerates while flying on an easterly
or westerly heading, causing the compass card to rotate
toward South.
Decision altitude (DA). A specified altitude in the precision
approach, charted in feet MSL, at which a missed approach
must be initiated if the required visual reference to continue
the approach has not been established.
Decision height (DH). A specified altitude in the precision
approach, charted in height above threshold elevation,
at which a decision must be made either to continue the
approach or to execute a missed approach.
Deice. The act of removing ice accumulation from an
aircraft structure.
Density altitude. Pressure altitude corrected for nonstandard
temperature. Density altitude is used in computing the
performance of an aircraft and its engines.
Departure procedure (DP). Preplanned IFR ATC departure,
published for pilot use, in textual and graphic format.
Deviation. A magnetic compass error caused by local
magnetic fields within the aircraft. Deviation error is different
on each heading.
DGPS. Differential global positioning system.
DH. See decision height.

Differential Global Positioning System (DGPS). A system
that improves the accuracy of Global Navigation Satellite
Systems (GNSS) by measuring changes in variables to
provide satellite positioning corrections.
Direct indication. The true and instantaneous reflection of
aircraft pitch-and-bank attitude by the miniature aircraft,
relative to the horizon bar of the attitude indicator.
Direct User Access Terminal System (DUATS). A system
that provides current FAA weather and flight plan filing
services to certified civil pilots, via personal computer,
modem, or telephone access to the system. Pilots can request
specific types of weather briefings and other pertinent data
for planned flights.
Distance circle. See reference circle.
Distance measuring equipment (DME). A pulse-type
electronic navigation system that shows the pilot, by an
instrument-panel indication, the number of nautical miles
between the aircraft and a ground station or waypoint.
DME. See distance measuring equipment.
DME arc. A flight track that is a constant distance from the
station or waypoint.
DOD. Department of Defense.
Doghouse. A turn-and-slip indicator dial mark in the shape
of a doghouse.
Domestic Reduced Vertical Separation Minimum
(DRVSM). Additional flight levels between FL 290 and FL
410 to provide operational, traffic, and airspace efficiency.
Double gimbal. A type of mount used for the gyro in an
attitude instrument. The axes of the two gimbals are at right
angles to the spin axis of the gyro, allowing free motion in
two planes around the gyro.
DP. See departure procedure.
Drag. The net aerodynamic force parallel to the relative
wind, usually the sum of two components: induced drag
and parasite drag.
Drag curve. The curve created when plotting induced drag
and parasite drag.
DUATS. See direct user access terminal system.
Duplex. Transmitting on one frequency and receiving on a
separate frequency.
Eddy currents. Current induced in a metal cup or disc when
it is crossed by lines of flux from a moving magnet.
EFAS. See En Route Flight Advisory Service.
EFC. See expect-further-clearance.
Electronic flight display (EFD). For the purpose of
standardization, any flight instrument display that uses
LCD or other image-producing system (Cathode Ray Tube
[CRT], etc.)
Elevator illusion. The sensation of being in a climb or
descent, caused by the kind of abrupt vertical accelerations
that result from up- or downdrafts.
Emergency. A distress or urgent condition.
Emphasis error. The result of giving too much attention
to a particular instrument during the cross-check, instead of
relying on a combination of instruments necessary for attitude
and performance information.
EM wave. Electromagnetic wave.
Encoding altimeter. A special type of pressure altimeter
used to send a signal to the air traffic controller on the ground,
showing the pressure altitude the aircraft is flying.
En route facilities ring. Depicted in the plan view of IAP
charts, a circle which designates NAVAIDs, fixes, and
intersections that are part of the en route low altitude airway
structure.
En Route Flight Advisory Service (EFAS). An en route
weather-only AFSS service.
En route high-altitude charts. Aeronautical charts for en
route instrument navigation at or above 18,000 feet MSL.
En route low-altitude charts. Aeronautical charts for en
route IFR navigation below 18,000 feet MSL.
Equivalent airspeed. Airspeed equivalent to CAS in
standard atmosphere at sea level. As the airspeed and pressure
altitude increase, the CAS becomes higher than it should be,
and a correction for compression must be subtracted from
the CAS.

Expect-further-clearance (EFC). The time a pilot can
expect to receive clearance beyond a clearance limit.
FAA. Federal Aviation Administration.
FAF. See final approach fix.
False horizon. Inaccurate visual information for aligning the
aircraft, caused by various natural and geometric formations
that disorient the pilot from the actual horizon.
Federal airways. Class E airspace areas that extend upward
from 1,200 feet to, but not including, 18,000 feet MSL, unless
otherwise specified.
Feeder facilities. Used by ATC to direct aircraft to
intervening fixes between the en route structure and the
initial approach fix.
Final approach. Part of an instrument approach
procedure in which alignment and descent for landing are
accomplished.
Final approach fix (FAF). The fix from which the IFR
final approach to an airport is executed, and which identifies
the beginning of the final approach segment. An FAF is
designated on government charts by a Maltese cross symbol
for nonprecision approaches, and a lightning bolt symbol for
precision approaches.
Fixating. Staring at a single instrument, thereby interrupting
the cross-check process.
FL. See flight level.
Flight configurations. Adjusting the aircraft control surfaces
(including flaps and landing gear) in a manner that will
achieve a specified attitude.
Flight director indicator (FDI). One of the major components
of a flight director system, it provides steering commands that
the pilot (or the autopilot, if coupled) follows.
Flight level (FL). A measure of altitude (in hundreds of feet)
used by aircraft flying above 18,000 feet with the altimeter
set at 29.92" Hg.
Flight management system (FMS). Provides pilot and crew
with highly accurate and automatic long-range navigation
capability, blending available inputs from long- and short-
range sensors.
Flightpath. The line, course, or track along which an aircraft
is flying or is intended to be flown.
Flight patterns. Basic maneuvers, flown by reference to the
instruments rather than outside visual cues, for the purpose
of practicing basic attitude flying. The patterns simulate
maneuvers encountered on instrument flights such as holding
patterns, procedure turns, and approaches.
Flight strips. Paper strips containing instrument flight
information, used by ATC when processing flight plans.
FMS. See flight management system.
Form drag. The drag created because of the shape of a
component or the aircraft.
Fundamental skills. Pilot skills of instrument cross-check,
instrument interpretation, and aircraft control.
Glideslope (GS). Part of the ILS that projects a radio beam
upward at an angle of approximately 3° from the approach
end of an instrument runway. The glideslope provides
vertical guidance to aircraft on the final approach course for
the aircraft to follow when making an ILS approach along
the localizer path.
Glideslope intercept altitude. The minimum altitude of an
intermediate approach segment prescribed for a precision
approach that ensures obstacle clearance.
Global landing system (GLS). An instrument approach with
lateral and vertical guidance with integrity limits (similar to
barometric vertical navigation (BRO VNAV).
Global navigation satellite systems (GNSS). Satellite
navigation systems that provide autonomous geo-spatial
positioning with global coverage. It allows small electronic
receivers to determine their location (longitude, latitude, and
altitude) to within a few meters using time signals transmitted
along a line of sight by radio from satellites.
GNSS. See global navigation satellite systems.
Global positioning system (GPS). Navigation system
that uses satellite rather than ground-based transmitters for
location information.

Goniometer. As used in radio frequency (RF) antenna
systems, a direction-sensing device consisting of two fixed
loops of wire oriented 90° from each other, which separately
sense received signal strength and send those signals to two
rotors (also oriented 90°) in the sealed direction-indicating
instrument. The rotors are attached to the direction-indicating
needle of the instrument and rotated by a small motor until
minimum magnetic field is sensed near the rotors.
GPS. See global positioning system.
GPS Approach Overlay Program. An authorization for
pilots to use GPS avionics under IFR for flying designated
existing nonprecision instrument approach procedures, with
the exception of LOC, LDA, and SDF procedures.
Graveyard spiral. The illusion of the cessation of a turn
while still in a prolonged, coordinated, constant rate turn,
which can lead a disoriented pilot to a loss of control of the
aircraft.
Great circle route. The shortest distance across the surface
of a sphere (the Earth) between two points on the surface.
Ground proximity warning system (GPWS). A system
designed to determine an aircraft’s clearance above the Earth
and provides limited predictability about aircraft position
relative to rising terrain.
Groundspeed. Speed over the ground, either closing speed to
the station or waypoint, or speed over the ground in whatever
direction the aircraft is going at the moment, depending upon
the navigation system used.
GS. See glide slope.
GWPS. See ground proximity warning system.
HAA. See height above airport.
HAL. See height above landing.
HAT. See height above touchdown elevation.
Hazardous attitudes. Five aeronautical decision-making
attitudes that may contribute to poor pilot judgment:
antiauthority, impulsivity, invulnerability, machismo, and
resignation.
Hazardous Inflight Weather Advisory Service (HIWAS).
Service providing recorded weather forecasts broadcast to
airborne pilots over selected VORs.
Head-up display (HUD). A special type of flight viewing
screen that allows the pilot to watch the flight instruments
and other data while looking through the windshield of the
aircraft for other traffic, the approach lights, or the runway.
Height above airport (HAA). The height of the MDA above
the published airport elevation.
Height above landing (HAL). The height above a designated
helicopter landing area used for helicopter instrument
approach procedures.
Height above touchdown elevation (HAT). The DA/DH or
MDA above the highest runway elevation in the touchdown
zone (first 3,000 feet of the runway).
HF. High frequency.
Hg. Abbreviation for mercury, from the Latin
hydrargyrum.
HIWAS. See Hazardous Inflight Weather Advisory
Service.
Holding. A predetermined maneuver that keeps aircraft
within a specified airspace while awaiting further clearance
from ATC.
Holding pattern. A racetrack pattern, involving two turns
and two legs, used to keep an aircraft within a prescribed
airspace with respect to a geographic fix. A standard pattern
uses right turns; nonstandard patterns use left turns.
Homing. Flying the aircraft on any heading required to keep
the needle pointing to the 0° relative bearing position.
Horizontal situation indicator (HSI). A flight navigation
instrument that combines the heading indicator with a CDI,
in order to provide the pilot with better situational awareness
of location with respect to the courseline.
HSI. See horizontal situation indicator.
HUD. See head-up display.
Human factors. A multidisciplinary field encompassing the
behavioral and social sciences, engineering, and physiology,
to consider the variables that influence individual and
crew performance for the purpose of optimizing human
performance and reducing errors.

Hypoxia. A state of oxygen deficiency in the body sufficient
to impair functions of the brain and other organs.
IAF. See initial approach fix.
IAP. See instrument approach procedures.
IAS. See indicated airspeed.
ICAO. See International Civil Aviation Organization.
Ident. Air Traffic Control request for a pilot to push
the button on the transponder to identify return on the
controller’s scope.
IFR. See instrument flight rules.
ILS. See instrument landing system.
ILS categories. Categories of instrument approach
procedures allowed at airports equipped with the following
types of instrument landing systems:
ILS Category I: Provides for approach to a height
above touchdown of not less than 200 feet, and with
runway visual range of not less than 1,800 feet.
ILS Category II: Provides for approach to a height
above touchdown of not less than 100 feet and with
runway visual range of not less than 1,200 feet.
ILS Category IIIA: Provides for approach without
a decision height minimum and with runway visual
range of not less than 700 feet.
ILS Category IIIB: Provides for approach without
a decision height minimum and with runway visual
range of not less than 150 feet.
ILS Category IIIC: Provides for approach without a
decision height minimum and without runway visual
range minimum.
IMC. See instrument meteorological conditions.
Indicated airspeed (IAS). Shown on the dial of the
instrument airspeed indicator on an aircraft. Directly related
to calibrated airspeed (CAS), IAS includes instrument errors
and position error.
Indirect indication. A reflection of aircraft pitch-and-bank
attitude by the instruments other than the attitude indicator.
Induced drag. Drag caused by the same factors that produce
lift; its amount varies inversely with airspeed. As airspeed
decreases, the angle of attack must increase, in turn increasing
induced drag.
Induction icing. A type of ice in the induction system that
reduces the amount of air available for combustion. The most
commonly found induction icing is carburetor icing.
Inertial navigation system (INS). A computer-based
navigation system that tracks the movement of an aircraft
via signals produced by onboard accelerometers. The initial
location of the aircraft is entered into the computer, and all
subsequent movement of the aircraft is sensed and used to
keep the position updated. An INS does not require any inputs
from outside signals.
Initial approach fix (IAF). The fix depicted on IAP charts
where the instrument approach procedure (IAP) begins unless
otherwise authorized by ATC.
Inoperative components. Higher minimums are prescribed
when the specified visual aids are not functioning; this
information is listed in the Inoperative Components Table found
in the United States Terminal Procedures Publications.
INS. See inertial navigation system.
Instantaneous vertical speed indicator (IVSI). Assists in
interpretation by instantaneously indicating the rate of climb
or descent at a given moment with little or no lag as displayed
in a vertical speed indicator (VSI).
Instrument approach procedures (IAP). A series of
predetermined maneuvers for the orderly transfer of an
aircraft under IFR from the beginning of the initial approach
to a landing or to a point from which a landing may be
made visually.
Instrument flight rules (IFR). Rules and regulations
established by the Federal Aviation Administration to govern
flight under conditions in which flight by outside visual
reference is not safe. IFR flight depends upon flying by
reference to instruments in the flight deck, and navigation is
accomplished by reference to electronic signals.
Instrument landing system (ILS). An electronic system
that provides both horizontal and vertical guidance to a
specific runway, used to execute a precision instrument
approach procedure.
Instrument meteorological conditions (IMC).
Meteorological conditions expressed in terms of visibility,
distance from clouds, and ceiling less than the minimums
specified for visual meteorological conditions, requiring
operations to be conducted under IFR.

Instrument takeoff. Using the instruments rather than
outside visual cues to maintain runway heading and execute
a safe takeoff.
Interference drag. Drag generated by the collision of
airstreams creating eddy currents, turbulence, or restrictions
to smooth flow.
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO). The
United Nations agency for developing the principles and
techniques of international air navigation, and fostering planning
and development of international civil air transport.
International standard atmosphere (IAS). A model of
standard variation of pressure and temperature.
Inversion illusion. The feeling that the aircraft is tumbling
backwards, caused by an abrupt change from climb to straight-
and-level flight while in situations lacking visual reference.
Inverter. A solid-state electronic device that converts D.C.
into A.C. current of the proper voltage and frequency to
operate A.C. gyro instruments.
Isogonic lines. Lines drawn across aeronautical charts to
connect points having the same magnetic variation.
IVSI. See instantaneous vertical speed indicator.
Jet route. A route designated to serve flight operations from
18,000 feet MSL up to and including FL 450.
Jet stream. A high-velocity narrow stream of winds, usually
found near the upper limit of the troposphere, which flows
generally from west to east.
KIAS. Knots indicated airspeed.
Kollsman window. A barometric scale window of a
sensitive altimeter used to adjust the altitude for the
altimeter setting.
LAAS. See local area augmentation system.
Lag. The delay that occurs before an instrument needle attains
a stable indication.
Land as soon as possible. ATC instruction to pilot. Land
without delay at the nearest suitable area, such as an open
field, at which a safe approach and landing is assured.
Land as soon as practical. ATC instruction to pilot. The
landing site and duration of flight are at the discretion of the
pilot. Extended flight beyond the nearest approved landing
area is not recommended.
Land immediately. ATC instruction to pilot. The urgency
of the landing is paramount. The primary consideration is
to ensure the survival of the occupants. Landing in trees,
water, or other unsafe areas should be considered only as
a last resort.
LDA. See localizer-type directional aid.
Lead radial. The radial at which the turn from the DME arc
to the inbound course is started.
Leans, the. A physical sensation caused by an abrupt
correction of a banked attitude entered too slowly to
stimulate the motion sensing system in the inner ear. The
abrupt correction can create the illusion of banking in the
opposite direction.
Lift. A component of the total aerodynamic force on an airfoil
and acts perpendicular to the relative wind.
Lines of flux. Invisible lines of magnetic force passing
between the poles of a magnet.
L/MF. See low or medium frequency.
LMM. See locator middle marker.
Load factor. The ratio of a specified load to the total weight
of the aircraft. The specified load is expressed in terms of
any of the following: aerodynamic forces, inertial forces, or
ground or water reactions.
Loadmeter. A type of ammeter installed between the generator
output and the main bus in an aircraft electrical system.
LOC. See localizer.
Local area augmentation system (LAAS). A differential
global positioning system (DGPS) that improves the accuracy
of the system by determining position error from the GPS
satellites, then transmitting the error, or corrective factors,
to the airborne GPS receiver.

Localizer (LOC). The portion of an ILS that gives left/right
guidance information down the centerline of the instrument
runway for final approach.
Localizer-type directional aid (LDA). A NAVAID used
for nonprecision instrument approaches with utility and
accuracy comparable to a localizer but which is not a part
of a complete ILS and is not aligned with the runway. Some
LDAs are equipped with a glide slope.
Locator middle marker (LMM). Nondirectional radio
beacon (NDB) compass locator, collocated with a middle
marker (MM).
Locator outer marker (LOM). NDB compass locator,
collocated with an outer marker (OM).
LOM. See locator outer marker.
Long range navigation (LORAN). An electronic
navigational system by which hyperbolic lines of position
are determined by measuring the difference in the time of
reception of synchronized pulse signals from two fixed
transmitters. LORAN A operates in the 1750 to 1950 kHz
frequency band. LORAN C and D operate in the 100 to 110
kHz frequency band.
LORAN. See long range navigation.
Low or medium frequency. A frequency range between
190–535 kHz with the medium frequency above 300
kHz. Generally associated with nondirectional beacons
transmitting a continuous carrier with either a 400 or 1,020
Hz modulation.
Lubber line. The reference line used in a magnetic compass
or heading indicator.
MAA. See maximum authorized altitude.
Mach number. The ratio of the true airspeed of the aircraft
to the speed of sound in the same atmospheric conditions,
named in honor of Ernst Mach, late 19th century physicist.
Mach meter. The instrument that displays the ratio of the
speed of sound to the true airspeed an aircraft is flying.
Magnetic bearing (MB). The direction to or from a radio
transmitting station measured relative to magnetic north.
Magnetic heading (MH). The direction an aircraft is pointed
with respect to magnetic north.
Mandatory altitude. An altitude depicted on an instrument
approach chart with the altitude value both underscored and
overscored. Aircraft are required to maintain altitude at the
depicted value.
Mandatory block altitude. An altitude depicted on an
instrument approach chart with two underscored and
overscored altitude values between which aircraft are
required to maintain altitude.
MAP. See missed approach point.
Margin identification. The top and bottom areas on an
instrument approach chart that depict information about
the procedure, including airport location and procedure
identification.
Marker beacon. A low-powered transmitter that directs its
signal upward in a small, fan-shaped pattern. Used along the
flight path when approaching an airport for landing, marker
beacons indicate both aurally and visually when the aircraft
is directly over the facility.
Maximum altitude. An altitude depicted on an instrument
approach chart with overscored altitude value at which or
below aircraft are required to maintain altitude.
Maximum authorized altitude (MAA). A published altitude
representing the maximum usable altitude or flight level for
an airspace structure or route segment.
MB. See magnetic bearing.
MCA. See minimum crossing altitude.
MDA. See minimum descent altitude.
MEA. See minimum en route altitude.
Mean sea level. The average height of the surface of the
sea at a particular location for all stages of the tide over a
19-year period.
MFD. See multi-function display.
MH. See magnetic heading.
MHz. Megahertz.

Microwave landing system (MLS). A precision instrument
approach system operating in the microwave spectrum which
normally consists of an azimuth station, elevation station,
and precision distance measuring equipment.
Mileage breakdown. A fix indicating a course change
that appears on the chart as an “x” at a break between two
segments of a federal airway.
Military operations area (MOA). Airspace established for
the purpose of separating certain military training activities
from IFR traffic.
Military training route (MTR). Airspace of defined vertical
and lateral dimensions established for the conduct of military
training at airspeeds in excess of 250 knots indicated airspeed
(KIAS).
Minimum altitude. An altitude depicted on an instrument
approach chart with the altitude value underscored. Aircraft are
required to maintain altitude at or above the depicted value.
Minimum crossing altitude (MCA). The lowest allowed
altitude at certain fixes an aircraft must cross when proceeding
in the direction of a higher minimum en route altitude
(MEA).
Minimum descent altitude (MDA). The lowest altitude (in
feet MSL) to which descent is authorized on final approach,
or during circle-to-land maneuvering in execution of a
nonprecision approach.
Minimum en route altitude (MEA). The lowest published
altitude between radio fixes that ensures acceptable
navigational signal coverage and meets obstacle clearance
requirements between those fixes.
Minimum obstruction clearance altitude (MOCA). The
lowest published altitude in effect between radio fixes on VOR
airways, off-airway routes, or route segments, which meets
obstacle clearance requirements for the entire route segment
and which ensures acceptable navigational signal coverage
only within 25 statute (22 nautical) miles of a VOR.
Minimum reception altitude (MRA). The lowest altitude
at which an airway intersection can be determined.
Minimum safe altitude (MSA). The minimum altitude
depicted on approach charts which provides at least 1,000 feet
of obstacle clearance for emergency use within a specified
distance from the listed navigation facility.
Minimum vectoring altitude (MVA). An IFR altitude lower
than the minimum en route altitude (MEA) that provides
terrain and obstacle clearance.
Minimums section. The area on an IAP chart that displays the
lowest altitude and visibility requirements for the approach.
Missed approach. A maneuver conducted by a pilot when an
instrument approach cannot be completed to a landing.
Missed approach point (MAP). A point prescribed in each
instrument approach at which a missed approach procedure
shall be executed if the required visual reference has not
been established.
Mixed ice. A mixture of clear ice and rime ice.
MLS. See microwave landing system.
MM. Middle marker.
MOA. See military operations area.
MOCA. See minimum obstruction clearance altitude.
Mode C. Altitude reporting transponder mode.
MRA. See minimum reception altitude.
MSA. See minimum safe altitude.
MSL. See mean sea level.
MTR. See military training route.
Multi-function display (MFD). Small screen (CRT or LCD)
in an aircraft that can be used to display information to the
pilot in numerous configurable ways. Often an MFD will be
used in concert with a Primary Flight Display.
MVA. See minimum vectoring altitude.
NACG. See National Aeronautical Charting Group.
NAS. See National Airspace System.
National Airspace System (NAS). The common network of
United States airspace—air navigation facilities, equipment
and services, airports or landing areas; aeronautical charts,
information and services; rules, regulations and procedures,
technical information; and manpower and material.

National Aeronautical Charting Group (NACG). A
Federal agency operating under the FAA, responsible for
publishing charts such as the terminal procedures and en
route charts.
National Route Program (NRP). A set of rules and
procedures designed to increase the flexibility of user flight
planning within published guidelines.
National Security Area (NSA). Areas consisting of airspace of
defined vertical and lateral dimensions established at locations
where there is a requirement for increased security and safety
of ground facilities. Pilots are requested to voluntarily avoid
flying through the depicted NSA. When it is necessary to
provide a greater level of security and safety, flight in NSAs
may be temporarily prohibited. Regulatory prohibitions are
disseminated via NOTAMs.
National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB). A United
States Government independent organization responsible for
investigations of accidents involving aviation, highways,
waterways, pipelines, and railroads in the United States.
NTSB is charged by congress to investigate every civil
aviation accident in the United States.
NAVAID. Naviagtional aid.
NAV/COM. Navigation and communication radio.
NDB. See nondirectional radio beacon.
NM. Nautical mile.
NOAA. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
No-gyro approach. A radar approach that may be used in
case of a malfunctioning gyro-compass or directional gyro.
Instead of providing the pilot with headings to be flown,
the controller observes the radar track and issues control
instructions “turn right/left” or “stop turn,” as appropriate.
Nondirectional radio beacon (NDB). A ground-based radio
transmitter that transmits radio energy in all directions.
Nonprecision approach. A standard instrument approach
procedure in which only horizontal guidance is provided.
No procedure turn (NoPT). Term used with the appropriate
course and altitude to denote that the procedure turn is not
required.
NoPT. See no procedure turn.
Notice to Airmen (NOTAM). A notice filed with an aviation
authority to alert aircraft pilots of any hazards en route or at
a specific location. The authority in turn provides means of
disseminating relevant NOTAMs to pilots.
NRP. See National Route Program.
NSA. See National Security Area.
NTSB. See National Transportation Safety Board.
NWS. National Weather Service.
Obstacle departure procedures (ODP). Obstacle clearance
protection provided to aircraft in instrument meteorological
conditions (IMC).
ODP. See obstacle departure procedures.
OM. Outer marker.
Omission error. The failure to anticipate significant
instrument indications following attitude changes; for
example, concentrating on pitch control while forgetting
about heading or roll information, resulting in erratic control
of heading and bank.
Optical illusion. A misleading visual image. For the
purpose of this handbook, the term refers to the brain’s
misinterpretation of features on the ground associated
with landing, which causes a pilot to misread the spatial
relationships between the aircraft and the runway.
Orientation. Awareness of the position of the aircraft and
of oneself in relation to a specific reference point.
Otolith organ. An inner ear organ that detects linear
acceleration and gravity orientation.
Outer marker. A marker beacon at or near the glide slope
intercept altitude of an ILS approach. It is normally located
four to seven miles from the runway threshold on the
extended centerline of the runway.
Overcontrolling. Using more movement in the control
column than is necessary to achieve the desired pitch-and
bank condition.
Overpower. To use more power than required for the purpose
of achieving a faster rate of airspeed change.

P-static. See precipitation static.
PAPI. See precision approach path indicator.
PAR. See precision approach radar.
Parasite drag. Drag caused by the friction of air moving
over the aircraft structure; its amount varies directly with
the airspeed.
PFD. See primary flight display.
PIC. See pilot-in-command.
Pilot-in-command (PIC). The pilot responsible for the
operation and safety of an aircraft.
Pilot report (PIREP). Report of meteorological phenomena
encountered by aircraft.
Pilot’s Operating Handbook/Airplane Flight Manual
(POH/AFM). FAA-approved documents published by the
airframe manufacturer that list the operating conditions for
a particular model of aircraft.
PIREP. See pilot report.
Pitot pressure. Ram air pressure used to measure airspeed.
Pitot-static head. A combination pickup used to sample pitot
pressure and static air pressure.
Plan view. The overhead view of an approach procedure on
an instrument approach chart. The plan view depicts the routes
that guide the pilot from the en route segments to the IAF.
POH/AFM. See Pilot’s Operating Handbook/Airplane
Flight Manual.
Point-in-space approach. A type of helicopter instrument
approach procedure to a missed approach point more than
2,600 feet from an associated helicopter landing area.
Position error. Error in the indication of the altimeter, ASI,
and VSI caused by the air at the static system entrance not
being absolutely still.
Position report. A report over a known location as
transmitted by an aircraft to ATC.
Precession. The characteristic of a gyroscope that causes an
applied force to be felt, not at the point of application, but
90° from that point in the direction of rotation.
Precipitation static (P-static). A form of radio interference
caused by rain, snow, or dust particles hitting the antenna and
inducing a small radio-frequency voltage into it.
Precision approach. A standard instrument approach
procedure in which both vertical and horizontal guidance
is provided.
Precision approach path indicator (PAPI). A system of
lights similar to the VASI, but consisting of one row of lights
in two- or four-light systems. A pilot on the correct glide slope
will see two white lights and two red lights. See VASI.
Precision approach radar (PAR). A type of radar used
at an airport to guide an aircraft through the final stages of
landing, providing horizontal and vertical guidance. The
radar operator directs the pilot to change heading or adjust
the descent rate to keep the aircraft on a path that allows it
to touch down at the correct spot on the runway.
Precision runway monitor (PRM). System allows
simultaneous, independent Instrument Flight Rules (IFR)
approaches at airports with closely spaced parallel runways.
Preferred IFR routes. Routes established in the major
terminal and en route environments to increase system
efficiency and capacity. IFR clearances are issued based on
these routes, listed in the A/FD except when severe weather
avoidance procedures or other factors dictate otherwise.
Pressure altitude. Altitude above the standard 29.92" Hg
plane.
Prevailing visibility. The greatest horizontal visibility
equaled or exceeded throughout at least half the horizon
circle (which is not necessarily continuous).
Primary and supporting. A method of attitude instrument
flying using the instrument that provides the most direct
indication of attitude and performance.
Primary flight display (PFD). A display that provides
increased situational awareness to the pilot by replacing the
traditional six instruments used for instrument flight with
an easy-to-scan display that provides the horizon, airspeed,
altitude, vertical speed, trend, trim, rate of turn among other
key relevant indications.
PRM. See precision runway monitor.
Procedure turn. A maneuver prescribed when it is necessary
to reverse direction to establish an aircraft on the intermediate
approach segment or final approach course.

Profile view. Side view of an IAP chart illustrating the vertical
approach path altitudes, headings, distances, and fixes.
Prohibited area. Designated airspace within which flight of
aircraft is prohibited.
Propeller/rotor modulation error. Certain propeller RPM
settings or helicopter rotor speeds can cause the VOR course
deviation indicator (CDI) to fluctuate as much as ±6°. Slight
changes to the RPM setting will normally smooth out this
roughness.
Rabbit, the. High-intensity flasher system installed at many
large airports. The flashers consist of a series of brilliant
blue-white bursts of light flashing in sequence along the
approach lights, giving the effect of a ball of light traveling
towards the runway.
Radar. Radio Detection And Ranging.
Radar approach. The controller provides vectors while
monitoring the progress of the flight with radar, guiding
the pilot through the descent to the airport/heliport or to a
specific runway.
Radials. The courses oriented from a station.
Radio or radar altimeter. An electronic altimeter that
determines the height of an aircraft above the terrain by
measuring the time needed for a pulse of radio-frequency
energy to travel from the aircraft to the ground and return.
Radio frequency (RF). A term that refers to alternating
current (AC) having characteristics such that, if the current is
input to antenna, an electromagnetic (EM) field is generated
suitable for wireless broadcasting and/or communications.
Radio magnetic indicator (RMI). An electronic navigation
instrument that combines a magnetic compass card with two
bearing pointers (typically). Generally, one pointer is for the
ADF while the other is for an RNAV or VOR navigation
system. The pointers are typically different colors and of
different widths for ease of identification. Sometimes a
function switch is provided to allow the #2 pointer to be
slaved to either a VOR or RNAV system. The card of the
RMI acts as a gyro-stabilized magnetic compass (usually
corrected for north via a flux valve) and shows the magnetic
heading the aircraft is flying.
Radio wave. An electromagnetic wave (EM wave) with
frequency characteristics useful for radio transmission.
RAIM. See receiver autonomous integrity monitoring.
Random RNAV routes. Direct routes, based on area
navigation capability, between waypoints defined in terms
of latitude/longitude coordinates, degree-distance fixes, or
offsets from established routes/airways at a specified distance
and direction.
Ranging signals. Transmitted from the GPS satellite, these
allow the aircraft’s receiver to determine range (distance)
from each satellite.
RB. See relative bearing.
RBI. See relative bearing indicator.
RCO. See remote communications outlet.
Receiver autonomous integrity monitoring (RAIM).
A system used to verify the usability of the received GPS
signals and warns the pilot of any malfunction in the
navigation system. This system is required for IFR-certified
GPS units.
Recommended altitude. An altitude depicted on an
instrument approach chart with the altitude value neither
underscored nor overscored. The depicted value is an
advisory value.
Receiver-transmitter (RT). A system that permits selection
of a unique channel or frequency whereupon a signal (typically
communication) can be transmitted and received.
Reduced vertical separation minimum (RVSM). Reduces
the vertical separation between flight level (FL) 290–410
from 2,000 feet to 1,000 feet and makes six additional FLs
available for operation. Also see DRVSM.
Reference circle (also, distance circle). The circle depicted
in the plan view of an IAP chart that typically has a 10 NM
radius, within which chart the elements are drawn to scale.
Regions of command. The “regions of normal and reversed
command” refers to the relationship between speed and the
power required to maintain or change that speed in flight.
REIL. See runway end identifier lights.
Relative bearing (RB). The angular difference between the
aircraft heading and the direction to the station, measured
clockwise from the nose of the aircraft.
Relative bearing indicator (RBI). Also known as the fixed-
card ADF, zero is always indicated at the top of the instrument
and the needle indicates the relative bearing to the station.

Relative wind. Direction of the airflow produced by an object
moving through the air. The relative wind for an airplane in
flight flows in a direction parallel with and opposite to the
direction of flight; therefore, the actual flight path of the
airplane determines the direction of the relative wind.
Remote communications outlet (RCO). An unmanned
communications facility that is remotely controlled by air
traffic personnel.
Required navigation performance (RNP). A specified level
of accuracy defined by a lateral area of confined airspace in
which an RNP-certified aircraft operates.
Restricted area. Airspace designated under 14 CFR part
73 within which the flight of aircraft, while not wholly
prohibited, is subject to restriction.
Reverse sensing. The VOR needle appearing to indicate the
reverse of normal operation.
RF. Radio frequency.
Rhodopsin. The photosensitive pigments that initiate the
visual response in the rods of the eye.
Rigidity. The characteristic of a gyroscope that prevents its
axis of rotation tilting as the Earth rotates.
Rime ice. Rough, milky, opaque ice formed by the
instantaneous freezing of small supercooled water droplets.
Risk. The future impact of a hazard that is not eliminated
or controlled.
RMI. See radio magnetic indicator.
RNAV. See area navigation.
RNP. See required navigation performance.
Runway end identifier lights (REIL). A pair of synchronized
flashing lights, located laterally on each side of the runway
threshold, providing rapid and positive identification of the
approach end of a runway.
Runway visibility value (RVV). The visibility determined
for a particular runway by a transmissometer.
Runway visual range (RVR). The instrumentally derived
horizontal distance a pilot should be able to see down the
runway from the approach end, based on either the sighting
of high-intensity runway lights, or the visual contrast of
other objects.
RVR. See runway visual range.
RVV. See runway visibility value.
St. Elmo’s Fire. A corona discharge which lights up the aircraft
surface areas where maximum static discharge occurs.
Satellite ephemeris data. Data broadcast by the GPS
satellite containing very accurate orbital data for that
satellite, atmospheric propagation data, and satellite clock
error data.
Scan. The first fundamental skill of instrument flight, also
known as “cross-check;” the continuous and logical observation
of instruments for attitude and performance information.
SDF. See simplified directional facility.
Selective availability. A satellite technology permitting the
Department of Defense (DOD) to create, in the interest of
national security, a significant clock and ephemeris error in
the satellites, resulting in a navigation error.
Semicircular canal. An inner ear organ that detects angular
acceleration of the body.
Sensitive altimeter. A form of multipointer pneumatic
altimeter with an adjustable barometric scale that allows the
reference pressure to be set to any desired level.
SIDS. See standard instrument departure procedures.
SIGMET. The acronym for Significant Meteorological
information. A weather advisory issued concerning weather
significant to the safety of all aircraft.
Signal-to-noise ratio. An indication of signal strength
received compared to background noise, which is a measure
of how adequate the received signal is.

Simplex. Transmission and reception on the same
frequency.
Simplified directional facility (SDF). A NAVAID used
for nonprecision instrument approaches. The final approach
course is similar to that of an ILS localizer; however, the
SDF course may be offset from the runway, generally not
more than 3°, and the course may be wider than the localizer,
resulting in a lower degree of accuracy.
Single-pilot resource management (SRM). The ability for
crew or pilot to manage all resources effectively to ensure
the outcome of the flight is successful.
Situational awareness. Pilot knowledge of where the
aircraft is in regard to location, air traffic control, weather,
regulations, aircraft status, and other factors that may affect
flight.
Skidding turn. An uncoordinated turn in which the rate of
turn is too great for the angle of bank, pulling the aircraft to
the outside of the turn.
Skin friction drag. Drag generated between air molecules
and the solid surface of the aircraft.
Slant range. The horizontal distance from the aircraft antenna
to the ground station, due to line-of-sight transmission of the
DME signal.
Slaved compass. A system whereby the heading gyro is
“slaved to,” or continuously corrected to bring its direction
readings into agreement with a remotely located magnetic
direction sensing device (usually this is a flux valve or flux
gate compass).
Slipping turn. An uncoordinated turn in which the aircraft
is banked too much for the rate of turn, so the horizontal lift
component is greater than the centrifugal force, pulling the
aircraft toward the inside of the turn.
Small airplane. An airplane of 12,500 pounds or less
maximum certificated takeoff weight.
Somatogravic illusion. The misperception of being
in a nose-up or nose-down attitude, caused by a rapid
acceleration or deceleration while in flight situations that
lack visual reference.
Spatial disorientation. The state of confusion due to
misleading information being sent to the brain from various
sensory organs, resulting in a lack of awareness of the aircraft
position in relation to a specific reference point.
Special use airspace. Airspace in which flight activities are
subject to restrictions that can create limitations on the mixed
use of airspace. Consists of prohibited, restricted, warning,
military operations, and alert areas.
SRM. See single-pilot resource management.
SSR. See secondary surveillance radar.
SSV. See standard service volume.
Standard holding pattern. A holding pattern in which all
turns are made to the right.
Standard instrument departure procedures (SIDS).
Published procedures to expedite clearance delivery and to
facilitate transition between takeoff and en route operations.
Standard rate turn. A turn in which an aircraft changes its
direction at a rate of 3° per second. The turn indicators are
typically 2 minute or 4 minute instruments. In a 2 minute
instrument, if the needle is one needle width either side of
the center alignment mark, the turn is 3° per second and the
turn takes 2 minutes to execute a 360° turn. In a 4 minute
instrument, the same turn takes two widths deflection of the
needle to achieve 3° per second. The 4 minute turn instrument
is usually found on high performance aircraft.
Standard service volume (SSV). Defines the limits of the
volume of airspace which the VOR serves.
Standard terminal arrival route (STAR). A preplanned
IFR ATC arrival procedure published for pilot use in graphic
and/or textual form.
STAR. See standard terminal arrival route.
Static longitudinal stability. The aerodynamic pitching
moments required to return the aircraft to the equilibrium
angle of attack.
Static pressure. Pressure of air that is still, or not moving,
measured perpendicular to the surface of the aircraft.
Steep turns. In instrument flight, any turn greater than standard
rate; in visual flight, anything greater than a 45° bank.
Stepdown fix. The point after which additional descent is
permitted within a segment of an IAP.
Strapdown system. An INS in which the accelerometers
and gyros are permanently “strapped down” or aligned with
the three axes of the aircraft.

Stress. The body’s response to demands placed upon it.
Structural icing. The accumulation of ice on the exterior
of the aircraft.
Suction relief valve. A relief valve in an instrument vacuum
system required to maintain the correct low pressure inside
the instrument case for the proper operation of the gyros.
Synchro. A device used to transmit indications of angular
movement or position from one location to another.
Synthetic vision. A realistic display depiction of the aircraft
in relation to terrain and flight path.
TAA. See terminal arrival area.
TACAN. See tactical air navigation.
Tactical air navigation (TACAN). An electronic navigation
system used by military aircraft, providing both distance and
direction information.
TAWS. See terrain awareness and warning system.
TCAS. See traffic alert collision avoidance system.
TCH. See threshold crossing height.
TDZE. See touchdown zone elevation.
TEC. See Tower En Route Control.
Technique. The manner in which procedures are executed.
Temporary flight restriction (TFR). Restriction to flight
imposed in order to:
1.
Protect persons and property in the air or on the
surface from an existing or imminent flight associated
hazard;
2.
Provide a safe environment for the operation of
disaster relief aircraft;
3.
Prevent an unsafe congestion of sightseeing aircraft
above an incident;
4.
Protect the President, Vice President, or other public
figures; and,
5.
Provide a safe environment for space agency
operations.
Pilots are expected to check appropriate NOTAMs during
flight planning when conducting flight in an area where a
temporary flight restriction is in effect.
Tension. Maintaining an excessively strong grip on the control
column, usually resulting in an overcontrolled situation.
Terminal Instrument Approach Procedure (TERP).
Prescribes standardized methods for use in designing
instrument flight procedures.
Terminal arrival area (TAA). A procedure to provide a
new transition method for arriving aircraft equipped with
FMS and/or GPS navigational equipment. The TAA contains
a “T” structure that normally provides a NoPT for aircraft
using the approach.
TERP. See terminal instrument approach procedure.
Terrain Awareness and Warning System (TAWS). A
timed-based system that provides information concerning
potential hazards with fixed objects by using GPS positioning
and a database of terrain and obstructions to provide true
predictability of the upcoming terrain and obstacles.
TFR. See temporary flight restriction.
Threshold crossing height (TCH). The theoretical height
above the runway threshold at which the aircraft’s glide
slope antenna would be if the aircraft maintains the trajectory
established by the mean ILS glide slope or MLS glide path.
Thrust (aerodynamic force). The forward aerodynamic
force produced by a propeller, fan, or turbojet engine as it
forces a mass of air to the rear, behind the aircraft.
Time and speed table. A table depicted on an instrument
approach procedure chart that identifies the distance from the
FAF to the MAP, and provides the time required to transit
that distance based on various groundspeeds.
Timed turn. A turn in which the clock and the turn
coordinator are used to change heading a definite number of
degrees in a given time.
TIS. See traffic information service.
Title 14 of the Code of Federal Regulations (14 CFR).
The federal aviation regulations governing the operation of
aircraft, airways, and airmen.
Touchdown zone elevation (TDZE). The highest elevation
in the first 3,000 feet of the landing surface, TDZE is
indicated on the instrument approach procedure chart when
straight-in landing minimums are authorized.

Tower En Route Control (TEC). The control of IFR en route
traffic within delegated airspace between two or more adjacent
approach control facilities, designed to expedite traffic and
reduce control and pilot communication requirements.
TPP. See United States Terminal Procedures Publication.
Tracking. Flying a heading that will maintain the desired track
to or from the station regardless of crosswind conditions.
Traffic Alert Collision Avoidance System (TCAS).
An airborne system developed by the FAA that operates
independently from the ground-based Air Traffic Control
system. Designed to increase flight deck awareness of
proximate aircraft and to serve as a “last line of defense” for
the prevention of mid-air collisions.
Traffic information service (TIS). A ground-based service
providing information to the flight deck via data link using
the S-mode transponder and altitude encoder to improve the
safety and efficiency of “see and avoid” flight through an
automatic display that informs the pilot of nearby traffic.
Transcribed Weather Broadcast (TWEB). Meteorological
and aeronautical data recorded on tapes and broadcast over
selected NAVAIDs. Generally, the broadcast contains route-
oriented data with specially prepared NWS forecasts, inflight
advisories, and winds aloft. It also includes selected current
information such as weather reports (METAR/SPECI),
NOTAMs, and special notices.
Transponder. The airborne portion of the ATC radar
beacon system.
Transponder code. One of 4,096 four-digit discrete codes
ATC assigns to distinguish between aircraft.
Trend. Immediate indication of the direction of aircraft
movement, as shown on instruments.
Trim. Adjusting the aerodynamic forces on the control
surfaces so that the aircraft maintains the set attitude without
any control input.
TWEB. See Transcribed Weather Broadcast.
True airspeed. Actual airspeed, determined by applying a
correction for pressure altitude and temperature to the CAS.
UHF. See ultra-high frequency.
Ultra-high frequency (UHF). The range of electromagnetic
frequencies between 962 MHz and 1213 MHz.
Uncaging. Unlocking the gimbals of a gyroscopic instrument,
making it susceptible to damage by abrupt flight maneuvers
or rough handling.
Underpower. Using less power than required for the purpose
of achieving a faster rate of airspeed change.
United States Terminal Procedures Publication (TPP).
Booklets published in regional format by the NACO that
include DPs, STARs, IAPs, and other information pertinent
to IFR flight.
Unusual attitude. An unintentional, unanticipated, or
extreme aircraft attitude.
User-defined waypoints. Waypoint location and other data
which may be input by the user, this is the only GPS database
information that may be altered (edited) by the user.
Variation. Compass error caused by the difference in
the physical locations of the magnetic north pole and the
geographic north pole.
VASI. See visual approach slope indicator.
VDP. See visual descent point.
Vectoring. Navigational guidance by assigning headings.
Venturi tube. A specially shaped tube attached to the outside
of an aircraft to produce suction to allow proper operation
of gyro instruments.
Vertical speed indicator (VSI). A rate-of-pressure change
instrument that gives an indication of any deviation from a
constant pressure level.
Very-high frequency (VHF). A band of radio frequencies
falling between 30 and 300 MHz.
Very-high frequency omnidirectional range (VOR).
Electronic navigation equipment in which the flight deck
instrument identifies the radial or line from the VOR station,
measured in degrees clockwise from magnetic north, along
which the aircraft is located.
Vestibule. The central cavity of the bony labyrinth of the ear,
or the parts of the membranous labyrinth that it contains.
VFR. See visual flight rules.
VFR-on-top. ATC authorization for an IFR aircraft to operate
in VFR conditions at any appropriate VFR altitude.

VFR over-the-top. A VFR operation in which an aircraft
operates in VFR conditions on top of an undercast.
Victor airways. Airways based on a centerline that extends
from one VOR or VORTAC navigation aid or intersection,
to another navigation aid (or through several navigation aids
or intersections); used to establish a known route for en route
procedures between terminal areas.
Visual approach slope indicator (VASI). A visual aid of
lights arranged to provide descent guidance information
during the approach to the runway. A pilot on the correct
glide slope will see red lights over white lights.
Visual descent point (VDP). A defined point on the final
approach course of a nonprecision straight-in approach
procedure from which normal descent from the MDA to the
runway touchdown point may be commenced, provided the
runway environment is clearly visible to the pilot.
Visual flight rules (VFR). Flight rules adopted by the
FAA governing aircraft flight using visual references. VFR
operations specify the amount of ceiling and the visibility the
pilot must have in order to operate according to these rules.
When the weather conditions are such that the pilot can not
operate according to VFR, he or she must use instrument
flight rules (IFR).
Visual meteorological conditions (VMC). Meteorological
conditions expressed in terms of visibility, distance from
cloud, and ceiling meeting or exceeding the minimums
specified for VFR.
VMC. See visual meteorological conditions.
VOR. See very-high frequency omnidirectional range.
VORTAC. A facility consisting of two components, VOR
and TACAN, which provides three individual services: VOR
azimuth, TACAN azimuth, and TACAN distance (DME) at
one site.
VOR test facility (VOT). A ground facility which emits a
test signal to check VOR receiver accuracy. Some VOTs are
available to the user while airborne, while others are limited
to ground use only.
VOT. See VOR test facility.
VSI. See vertical speed indicator.
WAAS. See wide area augmentation system.
Warning area. An area containing hazards to any aircraft
not participating in the activities being conducted in the
area. Warning areas may contain intensive military training,
gunnery exercises, or special weapons testing.
Waypoint. A designated geographical location used for route
definition or progress-reporting purposes and is defined in
terms of latitude/longitude coordinates.
WCA. See wind correction angle.
Weather and radar processor (WARP). A device that
provides real-time, accurate, predictive and strategic weather
information presented in an integrated manner in the National
Airspace System (NAS).
Weight. The force exerted by an aircraft from the pull of
gravity.
Wide area augmentation system (WAAS). A differential
global positioning system (DGPS) that improves the accuracy
of the system by determining position error from the GPS
satellites, then transmitting the error, or corrective factors,
to the airborne GPS receiver.
Wind correction angle (WCA). The angle between the
desired track and the heading of the aircraft necessary to
keep the aircraft tracking over the desired track.
Wind shear. A change in wind speed and/or wind direction
in a short distance.
Work. A measurement of force used to produce movement.
Zone of confusion. Volume of space above the station where
a lack of adequate navigation signal directly above the VOR
station causes the needle to deviate.

A
acceleration error..........................................................5-13
acceleration in cruise flight...........................................4-10
adf components............................................................9-3
advanced technologies..................................................9-24
advanced technology systems.......................................5-28
aerodynamic factors................................................ 4-1, 5-1
aerodynamics..................................................................4-2
aeronautical information manual (aim).............. 1-1, 10-2
aircraft control................................................................8-3
during instrument flight...............................................6-3
aircraft system malfunctions.........................................11-3
air data computer (adc)..............................................5-22
airplane trim....................................................................6-8
airport/facility directory (a/fd)...................................10-2
airport sketch/airport diagram......................................1-27
air route traffic control center (artcc)........................2-7
airspace classification.....................................................1-2
Class A........................................................................1-2
Class C........................................................................1-2
Class D........................................................................1-2
Class E........................................................................1-2
Class G........................................................................1-2
airspeed...........................................................................5-9
indicated airspeed (ias).............................................5-9
calibrated airspeed (cas)...........................................5-9
equivalent airspeed (eas)..........................................5-9
mach number.............................................................5-10
true airspeed (tas).....................................................5-9
airspeed changes
common errors..........................................................8-10
in straight-and-level flight............................... 7-11, 7-40
airspeed color codes.....................................................5-10
airspeed indicator (ASI). 5-8, 6-6, 6-8, 6-10, 7-6, 7-37, 8-5
air traffic control (atc).................................................2-1
alternator/generator failure...........................................11-5
altimeter................................................6-10, 7-3, 7-36, 8-4
enhancements (encoding)............................................5-7
analog instrument failure..............................................11-7
analog pictorial displays...............................................5-23
angle of attack.................................................................4-2
applying the four-step process......................................6-20
approach azimuth guidance..........................................9-43
approach control advances...........................................2-12
precision runway monitor (prm).............................2-12
prm benefits.............................................................2-13
prm radar.................................................................2-12
approach control facility...............................................2-12
approaches..................................................................10-13
lighting systems (als).............................................9-38
to airport with an operating tower...........................10-15
to airport without an operating control
tower.......................................................................10-13
to parallel runways..................................................10-20
to stall........................................................................7-26
area navigation (rnav)...............................................9-22
atc inflight weather avoidance assistance..................2-11
atc radar weather displays.........................................2-11
atc reports..................................................................10-7
atc towers....................................................................2-5
atmosphere......................................................................4-4
layers of the atmosphere.............................................4-5
attitude and heading reference system (ahrs)...........5-22
attitude control................................................................6-3
attitude direction indicator (adi).................................5-23
attitude indicator... 5-19, 6-4, 7-2, 7-6, 7-34, 7-37, 8-3, 8-5
attitude instrument flying
fundamental skills.....................................................6-24
primary and supporting method................................6-21
using the control and performance method.................6-2
using the primary and supporting method..................6-4
automated flight service stations (afss).......................2-4
automatic dependent surveillance—broadcast
(ads-b).......................................................................5-28
autopilot systems..........................................................5-25
usage.........................................................................7-58
autorotations.................................................................8-17
common errors..........................................................8-17
aviation magnetic compass...........................................5-10
Index

B
bank..............................................................................7-25
bank control........................... 6-4, 6-7, 6-20, 7-6, 7-37, 8-5
blockage of the pitot-static system.................................5-2
pitot system.................................................................5-2
static system................................................................5-3
C
cancelling ifr flight plans............................................10-3
center approach/departure control..................................2-7
certified checkpoints.....................................................9-16
change of airspeed
during turns...............................................................7-24
in turns......................................................................8-14
circling approaches.....................................................10-20
patterns......................................................................7-32
clearances.....................................................................10-3
separations.................................................................10-4
climbing and descending turns........................... 7-24, 8-15
climbing while accelerating............................................3-8
climbing while turning...................................................3-8
climbs................................................................. 4-10, 7-14
common cross-check errors..........................................6-11
communication equipment.............................................2-2
communication facilities................................................2-4
communication/navigation system malfunction...........11-8
communication procedures.............................................2-4
compass locator............................................................9-38
compass turns............................................ 7-21, 7-53, 8-15
compliance with published standard instrument
approach procedures...................................................10-13
conducting an ifr flight.............................................10-26
constant airspeed climb
from cruise airspeed..................................................7-46
from established airspeed..........................................7-47
constant rate climbs......................................................7-47
control and performance method..................................6-18
control instruments............................................... 6-2, 6-18
control sequence...........................................................2-13
coping with spatial disorientation...................................3-8
course deviation indicator (cdi)..................................9-11
course interception........................................................9-14
course reversal elements in plan view and profile
view..............................................................................1-20
procedure turns..........................................................1-20
holding in lieu of procedure turn..............................1-20
teardrop procedure....................................................1-21
D
density altitude................................................................4-5
departure procedures (dps)................................ 1-12, 10-5
departures and instrument departure
procedures (dps)..........................................................9-31
departures from airports without an operating control
tower.............................................................................10-7
descents............................................................... 7-16, 7-49
differential global positioning systems (dgps)...........9-32
distance measuring equipment (dme).........................9-17
arc..............................................................................9-17
components .............................................................9-17
function.....................................................................9-17
holding....................................................................10-13
disturbances to radio wave reception.............................9-3
diving or rolling beyond the vertical plane.....................3-8
diving while turning.......................................................3-8
drag.................................................................................4-3
induced drag................................................................4-3
parasite drag................................................................4-3
skin friction drag.........................................................4-3
interference drag.........................................................4-3
form drag.....................................................................4-4
drag curves......................................................................4-6
dry air vacuum pump....................................................5-17
dynamic pressure type instruments................................5-8
E
ears..................................................................................3-4
electrical systems..........................................................5-17
electronic flight display malfunction............................11-4
electronic flight instrument systems.............................5-27
emergencies..................................................................8-16
engine instruments..........................................................6-8
en route procedures.......................................................10-7
errors during compass turns..........................................7-26
establishing a standard rate turn...................................7-51
eyes.................................................................................3-2
F
federal airways................................................................1-4
filing in flight................................................................10-2
flags or other signal strength indicators........................9-11
flight director system (fds).........................................5-23
flight instruments.................................................. 4-16, 8-2
flight management systems (fms)............ 5-26, 5-27, 9-44
function.....................................................................9-46
flight services station (FFS)............................................2-4
flightpath.........................................................................4-2
flight support systems...................................................5-22
flux gate compass system.............................................5-15
four forces.......................................................................4-2
drag.............................................................................4-3
lift........................................................................ 4-2, 4-6

thrust...........................................................................4-3
weight..........................................................................4-3
function of adf.............................................................9-4
G
glideslope (gs).............................................................9-37
global navigation satellite system (gnss)...................9-24
global positioning system (gps)........................ 5-27, 9-25
components...............................................................9-25
errors.........................................................................9-31
function.....................................................................9-26
instrument approaches..............................................9-29
nearest airport function.............................................11-9
substitution................................................................9-27
substitution for adf or dme...................................9-27
ground proximity warning system (gpws).................5-34
ground wave...................................................................9-2
gyroscopic instruments.................................................5-19
gyroscopic systems.......................................................5-16
H
heading.........................................................................7-44
heading indicator................. 5-19, 6-7, 6-10, 7-7, 7-38, 8-6
head-up display (hud)...................................... 5-34, 9-46
height above landing (hal).........................................1-27
helicopter trim..............................................................6-10
holding instructions....................................................10-10
holding procedures.....................................................10-10
homing............................................................................9-5
horizontal situation indicator (hsi).................... 5-23, 7-38
how radio waves propagate............................................9-2
how to prevent landing errors due to optical illusions...3-9
I
iap minimums............................................................10-21
icao cold temperature error table.................................5-5
icing..............................................................................4-13
antenna icing.............................................................4-17
clear ice.....................................................................4-13
effects of icing on critical aircraft systems...............4-16
general effects of icing on airfoils............................4-14
induction icing..........................................................4-13
mixed ice...................................................................4-14
propeller icing...........................................................4-16
rime ice......................................................................4-14
structural icing.............................................. 4-13, 10-23
ifr en route charts.........................................................1-6
airport information......................................................1-6
charted ifr altitudes...................................................1-6
navigation features......................................................1-7
ifr flight plan...............................................................10-2
ifr flight using gps....................................................9-28
illusions leading to spatial disorientation.......................3-5
inadvertent icing encounter..........................................11-2
inadvertent thunderstorm encounter.............................11-2
inertial navigation system (ins)...................................9-34
ins components........................................................9-34
ins errors..................................................................9-34
inoperative components................................................1-27
instrument approach capabilities..................................9-32
instrument approaches to civil airports.......................10-13
instrument approach procedure charts..........................1-12
margin identification.................................................1-12
pilot briefing..............................................................1-16
plan view...................................................................1-16
instrument approach procedure (iap)..........................1-12
approach systems......................................................9-35
cross-check............................................... 6-10, 6-24, 8-2
instrument flight..............................................................8-2
instrument flight patterns.................................... 7-30, 7-61
instrument flying common errors.................................6-27
emphasis....................................................................6-28
fixation......................................................................6-27
omission....................................................................6-28
instrument interpretation...................................... 6-13, 8-3
instrument landing systems (ils).................................9-35
airborne components.................................................9-38
components...............................................................9-35
errors.........................................................................9-40
function.....................................................................9-40
instrument takeoff...................................... 7-29, 7-60, 8-17
common errors....................................... 7-29, 7-61, 8-18
instrument weather flying...........................................10-22
integrated flight control system....................................5-25
intercepting bearings......................................................9-8
intercepting lead radials................................................9-18
International Civil Aviation Organization (icao)........1-1
international standard atmosphere (isa)........................4-5
intersections....................................................................1-7
inverted-V cross-check.................................................6-11
L
landing........................................................................10-22
landing minimums........................................................1-23
large airplanes...............................................................4-10
law of inertia, the............................................................4-4
law of momentum, the....................................................4-4
law of reaction, the.........................................................4-4
learning methods.................................................. 6-2, 6-16
letters of agreement (loa)..........................................2-15

leveling off.......................................................... 7-16, 7-17
load factor.....................................................................4-12
local area augmentation system (laas)......................9-33
localizer........................................................................9-35
localizer type directional aid (lda).............................9-43
loss of alternator/generator for electronic flight
instrumentation.............................................................11-5
M
magnetic compass................................................. 5-10, 6-7
acceleration error......................................................5-13
construction...............................................................5-11
deviation....................................................................5-12
induced errors............................................................5-11
northerly turning errors.............................................5-13
oscillation error.........................................................5-14
southerly turning errors.............................................5-13
theory of operations..................................................5-11
variation....................................................................5-12
magnetism.....................................................................5-10
marker beacons................................................... 9-37, 9-40
master battery switch....................................................11-5
maximum allowable airspeed.......................................5-10
microwave landing system (mls)...............................9-43
missed approaches......................................................10-21
multi-function display (mfd)......................................5-28
N
National Aeronautical Navigation Services
(aeronav services)..................................................10-2
National Airspace System (nas)...................................1-1
navaids............................................................................1-7
navigating the mfd page groups...............................11-10
nearest airport page group.......................................11-10
nearest airports page soft keys................................11-10
nearest airports using the mfd...............................11-10
nearest airports using the pfd..................................11-9
navigation/communication equipment...........................2-2
navigation instruments.......................................... 6-2, 6-19
ndb components...........................................................9-3
nerves..............................................................................3-5
Newton’s First Law........................................................4-4
Newton’s Second Law....................................................4-4
Newton’s Third Law.......................................................4-4
nondirectional radio beacon (ndb)...............................9-3
nonprecision approaches..............................................1-23
nose-high attitudes........................................................7-27
nose-low attitudes.........................................................7-28
Notices to Airmen Publication (ntap).......................10-2
O
obstacle departure procedures (odp)................. 1-12, 10-5
omnibearing selector (obs).........................................9-11
operating on the main battery............................. 11-5, 11-6
operational errors of adf..............................................9-8
optical illusions...............................................................3-9
featureless terrain illusion...........................................3-9
fog................................................................... 3-9, 10-24
ground lighting illusions.............................................3-9
haze.............................................................................3-9
runway width illusion.................................................3-9
runway and terrain slopes illusion..............................3-9
water refraction...........................................................3-9
other routing...................................................................1-5
P
partial panel flight.........................................................7-36
performance instruments...................................... 6-2, 6-19
pitch.................................................................... 7-25, 7-43
pitch attitude instrument cross-check.............................6-7
pitch control......................... 6-4, 6-20, 6-22, 7-2, 7-34, 8-3
pitch/power relationship.................................................4-6
pitot/static instruments....................................................5-3
pitot/static system failure..............................................11-8
pitot/static systems..........................................................5-2
planning the descent and approach...............................10-8
pneumatic system failure..............................................11-7
pneumatic systems........................................................5-17
poh/afm....................................................................10-2
point in space approach................................................1-27
position reports.............................................................10-7
postural considerations...................................................3-7
power.................................................................. 7-26, 7-45
control....................................... 6-4, 6-8, 6-21, 7-8, 7-39
control during straight-and-level flight.......................8-7
settings.............................................................. 7-9, 7-39
sources.......................................................................5-17
precipitation static........................................................11-3
precision approaches....................................................1-23
preferred ifr..................................................................1-5
pressure altitude..............................................................4-5
pressure indicating systems..........................................5-17
primary bank.................................................................6-23
primary flight display (pfd)........................................5-27
primary pitch................................................................6-22
primary power..............................................................6-24
primary yaw..................................................................6-23
procedural steps in using control and performance........6-2
procedure turn...............................................................7-30

R
racetrack pattern...........................................................7-30
radar................................................................................2-3
radar and transponders....................................................2-3
Mode C (altitude reporting)........................................2-3
radar approaches.........................................................10-15
radar-controlled departures...........................................10-5
radar limitations............................................................9-48
radar monitoring of instrument approaches................10-18
radar navigation (ground-based)...................................9-46
radio altimeters.............................................................5-29
radio principles...............................................................9-2
recognizing unusual attitudes.......................................7-27
recovery from unusual attitudes...................................7-27
rectangular cross-check................................................6-11
reduced vertical separation minimum (rvsm).............5-7
regions of command.......................................................4-7
control characteristics.................................................4-7
relative wind...................................................................4-2
remote indicating compass...........................................5-15
required navigation instrument system inspection.......5-36
required navigation performance..................................9-44
reversal of motion...........................................................3-8
rnav instrument approach charts..............................1-30
route information..........................................................1-10
S
safety systems...............................................................5-29
scanning techniques......................................................6-24
selected radial cross-check................................. 6-11, 6-24
sensitive altimeter...........................................................5-3
altimeter errors............................................................5-4
cold weather altimeter errors......................................5-5
inherent altimeter error...............................................5-5
principle of operation..................................................5-3
sensory systems for orientation......................................3-2
servo failure..................................................................8-17
side-step maneuver.....................................................10-20
simplified directional facility (sdf).............................9-42
situational awareness..................................................11-11
sky wave.........................................................................9-2
slip/skid indicator.........................................................7-39
slow-speed flight.............................................................4-8
small airplanes................................................................4-9
sources of flight planning information.........................10-2
space wave......................................................................9-2
spatial disorientation........................................ 3-2, 3-5, 3-7
special use airspace.........................................................1-2
speed stability.................................................................4-8
normal command........................................................4-8
reversed command......................................................4-8
stall warning systems....................................................4-17
standard 45° procedure turn..........................................7-30
standard entry procedures...........................................10-11
standard holding pattern (no wind).............................10-10
standard holding pattern (with wind).........................10-10
standard instrument departures.....................................10-5
standard rate turns............................................... 7-19, 7-51
standard terminal arrival routes (stars).......... 1-12, 10-9
standby battery..............................................................11-6
static pressure.................................................................5-2
station passage................................................................9-5
steep turns........................................................... 7-22, 7-53
straight-and-level flight........................6-22, 7-2, 7-34, 8-3
common errors......................................... 7-12, 7-43, 8-7
straight climbs and descents............................... 7-14, 7-46
common errors....................................... 7-17, 7-50, 8-13
straight climbs (constant airspeed and constant rate)...8-10
straight descents (constant airspeed and
constant rate) ..............................................................8-12
substitutes for inoperative or unusable components...10-10
synthetic vision.............................................................5-28
systems preflight procedures........................................5-36
T
tailplane stall symptoms...............................................4-16
teardrop patterns...........................................................7-31
techniques for electrical usage............................ 11-5, 11-6
temporary flight restrictions (tfrs)..............................1-4
terminal arrival area (taa)..........................................1-18
terminal procedures publications..................................1-12
departure procedures.................................................1-12
marginal identification..............................................1-12
standard terminal arrival routes................................1-12
terminal radar approach control (tracon).................2-6
terrain alerting systems.................................................5-34
terrain awareness and warning system (taws)..........5-34
the four-step process used to change attitude...............6-19
adjust.........................................................................6-20
cross-check................................................................6-20
establish.....................................................................6-19
trim............................................................................6-20
tilting to right or left.......................................................3-8
timed approaches from a holding fix..........................10-18
timed turns................................................. 7-21, 7-53, 8-13
time factors.................................................................10-12
tower en route control (tec)................................. 1-6, 2-7
tracking...........................................................................9-5
tracking to and from the station....................................9-14
traditional navigation systems........................................9-3
traffic advisory systems................................................5-29
traffic alert and collision avoidance system (tcas)....5-30

traffic alert systems.......................................................5-30
traffic avoidance.........................................................11-12
traffic avoidance systems..............................................5-30
traffic information system.............................................5-29
transponders....................................................................2-3
trim.....................................................4-8, 6-20, 7-26, 7-45
control.........................................................................6-8
technique......................................................... 7-12, 7-43
turn-and-slip indicator.......................................... 5-20, 7-8
turn coordinator.................................................... 5-21, 7-7
turn coordinator/turn-and-slip indicator.........................6-8
turn indicator........................................................ 5-20, 8-7
turn rate indicator.........................................................7-38
turns..................................................4-10, 7-19, 7-51, 8-13
common errors................................................ 7-25, 8-15
coordination of rudder and aileron controls..............4-11
radius of turn.............................................................4-11
rate of turn.................................................................4-11
turns to predetermined headings................ 7-20, 7-52, 8-13
U
unforecast adverse weather...........................................11-2
unusual attitude recovery protection............................7-55
unusual attitudes...........................................................8-16
unusual attitudes and recoveries...................................7-26
common errors........................................... 7-28, 7-58, 8-16
V
vacuum pump systems..................................................5-17
venturi tube systems.....................................................5-17
vertical card magnetic compass....................................5-15
vertical descent angle (vda).......................................1-23
vertical speed indicator (vsi)...................5-8, 6-5, 7-4, 8-5
very high frequency omnidirectional range (vor)........9-8
function.....................................................................9-11
operational errors......................................................9-14
receiver accuracy check............................................9-16
test facility (vot).....................................................9-16
vestibular illusions..........................................................3-5
coriolis illusion............................................................3-6
elevator illusion...........................................................3-6
graveyard spiral...........................................................3-6
inversion illusion.........................................................3-6
leans, the.....................................................................3-5
somatogravic illusion..................................................3-6
vfr-on-top.................................................................10-26
vfr over-the-top........................................................10-26
visibility figures............................................................1-23
vision under dim and bright illumination.......................3-3
visual illusions................................................................3-7
false horizon................................................................3-7
autokinesis...................................................................3-7
vor accuracy..............................................................9-16
vor components.........................................................9-10
vor/dme rnav.......................................................9-22
components...............................................................9-23
function.....................................................................9-23
errors.........................................................................9-24
vsi tape........................................................................7-36
W
weather avoidance assistance.......................................2-11
weather conditions......................................................10-22
thunderstorms..........................................................10-24
turbulence................................................................10-22
volcanic ash.............................................................10-24
wind shear...............................................................10-25
weather information and communication features.......1-10
wet-type vacuum pump................................................5-17
wide area augmentation system (waas)....................9-32
wind shear...................................................................10-25
windshields...................................................................4-17
wing................................................................................4-2