Chapter 1
Departure Procedures
Introduction
Thousands of instrument flight rules (IFR) takeoffs and
departures occur daily in the National Airspace System
(NAS). In order to accommodate this volume of IFR traffic, air
traffic control (ATC) must rely on pilots to use charted airport
sketches and diagrams, as well as departure procedures
(DPs) that include both standard instrument departures
(SIDs) and obstacle departure procedures (ODPs). While
many charted (and uncharted) departures are based on
radar vectors, the bulk of IFR departures in the NAS require
pilots to navigate out of the terminal environment to the
en route phase.
1-1

IFR takeoffs and departures are fast-paced phases of
flight, and pilots often are overloaded with critical flight
information. While preparing for takeoff, pilots are busy
requesting and receiving clearances, preparing their aircraft
for departure, and taxiing to the active runway. During IFR
conditions, they are doing this with minimal visibility, and
they may be without constant radio communication if flying
out of a non-towered airport. Historically, takeoff minimums
for commercial operations have been successively reduced
through a combination of improved signage, runway
markings and lighting aids, and concentrated pilot
training and qualifications. Today at major terminals, some
commercial operators with appropriate equipment, pilot
qualifications, and approved Operations Specifications
(OpSpecs) may takeoff with visibility as low as 300 feet
runway visual range (RVR). One of the consequences of
takeoffs with reduced visibility is that pilots are challenged
in maintaining situational awareness during taxi operations.
Surface Movement Safety
One of the biggest safety concerns in aviation is the surface
movement accident. As a direct result, the FAA has rapidly
expanded the information available to pilots, including
the addition of taxiway and runway information in FAA
publications, particularly the IFR U.S. Terminal Procedures
Publication (TPP) booklets and the Chart Supplement (CS)
volumes. The FAA has also implemented new procedures
and created educational and awareness programs for
pilots, ATC, and ground operators. By focusing resources
to attack this problem head on, the FAA hopes to reduce
and eventually eliminate surface movement accidents.
Airport Sketches and Diagrams
Airport sketches and diagrams provide pilots of all levels
with graphical depictions of the airport layout. Aeronautical
Information Services, formerly known as Aeronautical
Products (AeroNav), provide an airport sketch on the lower
left or right portion of every instrument approach chart.
[Figure 1-1] This sketch depicts the runways, their length,
width and slope, the touchdown zone elevation, the lighting
system installed on the end of the runway, and taxiways.
Graphical depictions of NOTAMS are also available for
selected airports as well as for temporary flight restriction
(TFRs) areas on the defense internet NOTAM service (DINS)
website.
For select airports, typically those with heavy traffic or
complex runway layouts, Aeronautical Information Services
also prints an airport diagram. The diagram is located in
the IFR TPP booklet following the instrument approach
chart for a particular airport. It is a full page depiction of
the airport that includes the same features of the airport
sketch plus additional details, such as taxiway identifiers,
1-2
NOT FOR NAVIGATION
Runway length and width
Figure 1-1. Airport diagram included on the Oshkosh, Wisconsin
VOR RWY 9 Approach Chart as depicted in the IFR TPP.
airport latitude and longitude, and building identification.
The airport diagrams are also available in the Airport/Facility
Directory section of the Chart Supplement (CS) and on the
Aeronautical Information Services' website, located at
www.aeronav.faa.gov. [Figure 1-2]
Chart Supplements (CS)
In recent years, the former Airport/Facility Directory (A/
FD) booklet was incorporated as a section in the Chart
Supplement (CS). [Figure 2-14] The Chart Supplement
(CS) is published by Aeronautical Information Services in
regional booklets and online at: [https://www.faa.gov/
air_traffic/flight_info/aeronav/digital_products/dafd/]
The online version is known as the digital Chart Supplement
(d-CS). The d-CS and the CS are identical and provide
textual and graphic information about all airports, both
Visual Flight Rules (VFR) and IFR. The Airport/Facility
Directory (A/FD) section of the CS includes runway length
Runway slope
Runway numbers

On-airport buildings
NOT FOR NAVIGATION
Taxiway designations
EC-3, 29 JUL 2010 to 26 AUG 2010
Precise runway direction
Runway slope
Figure 1-2. Airport diagram of Oshkosh, Wisconsin as depicted in
the A/FD section of the CS.
and width, runway surface, load bearing capacity, runway
slope, runway declared distances, airport services, and
hazards, such as birds and reduced visibility. [Figure 1-3]
Sketches of airports also are being added to aid VFR pilots in
surface movement activities. In support of the FAA Runway
Incursion Program, full page airport diagrams and “Hot
Spot” locations are included in the A/FD section of the CS.
These charts are the same as those published in the IFR
TPP and are printed for airports with complex runway or
taxiway layouts.
Surface Movement Guidance Control System
(SMGCS)
The Surface Movement Guidance Control System
(SMGCS) was developed to facilitate the safe movement
of aircraft and vehicles at airports where scheduled
air carriers were conducting authorized operations.
Advisory Circular 120-57 was developed in 1992. In 2012,
FAA Order 8000.94, Procedures for Establishing Airport
Low-Visibility Operations and Approval of Low-Visibility
Operations/Surface Movement Guidance and Control
System Operations, was published to provide procedures
for establishing Airport Low-Visibility Operations (LVO)
Airport name and location
and Surface Movement Guidance and Control Systems. It
established the necessary FAA headquarters and operating
services, roles, responsibilities, and activities for operations
at 14 CFR Part 139 airports using RVRs of less than 1,200
feet for each runway. The order applies to all users of
the system at all levels who are formally listed. The FAA
requires the commissioning of an “FAA approved LVO/
SMGCS Operation” for all new Category III ILS supported
runways. Since there are no regulatory takeoff minimums
for 14 CFR Part 91 operations, the information provided by
FAA AC 120-57 and FAA Order 8000.94 must be understood
so that the general aviation pilot can understand LVO and
EC-3, 29 JUL 2010 to 26 AUG 2010
SMGCS during day or night.
The SMGCS low visibility taxi plan includes the enhancement
of taxiway and runway signs, markings, and lighting,
as well as the creation of SMGCS visual aid diagrams.
[Figure 1-4] The plan also clearly identifies taxi routes
and their supporting facilities and equipment. Airport
enhancements that are part of the SMGCS program include,
but are not limited to:
Longitude and latitude
•
Controllable Stop bars lights—these consist of a row
of red, unidirectional, in-pavement lights that can be
controlled by ATC. They provide interactions with
and aircraft that prevent runway incursions during
takeoff operations. These are required for operations
at less than 500 ft RVR.
•
Non-Controllable Stop bars lights—these are red,
unidirectinoal lights place at intersections where a
restriction to movement is required. They must be
in continuous operation at less than 500 ft RVR.
•
Taxiway centerline lead-on lights—guide ground
traffic under low visibility conditions and at night.
These lights consist of alternating green/yellow in-
pavement lights.
•
Runway guard lights—either elevated or in-
pavement, may be installed at all taxiways that
provide access to an active runway. They consist
of alternately flashing yellow lights. These lights
are used to denote both the presence of an active
runway and identify the location of a runway holding
position marking.
•
Geographic position markings—ATC verifies the
position of aircraft and vehicles using geographic
position markings. The markings can be used either
as hold points or for position reporting. These
checkpoints or “pink spots” are outlined with a black
and white circle and designated with a number or a
number and a letter.
1-3

Figure 1-3. Excerpts from the Chart Supplement (Airport Facility Directory section) of Naples Muni, Naples, Florida.
•
Clearance bar lights—three yellow in-pavement
clearance bar lights used to denote holding
positions for aircraft and vehicles. When used for
hold points, they are co-located with geographic
position markings.
Both flight and ground crews, Part 121 and 135 operators, are
required to comply with SMGCS plans when implemented
at their specific airport. All airport tenants are responsible
for disseminating information to their employees and
conducting training in low visibility operating procedures.
Anyone operating in conjunction with the SMGCS plan
must have a copy of the low visibility taxi route chart for
their given airport as these charts outline the taxi routes
and other detailed information concerning low visibility
operations. These charts are available from private sources
outside of the FAA. Government sources for SMGCS
charts may be available in the future. Part 91 operators
are expected to comply with the guidelines listed in AC
120-57, and should expect “Follow Me” service (when
available) when low visibility operations are in use. Any
SMGCS outage that would adversely affect operations at
1-4
the airport is issued as a Notice to Airmen (NOTAM).
Advanced Surface Movement Guidance Control
System (A-SMGCS)
With the increasing demand for airports to accommodate
higher levels of aircraft movements, it is becoming more
difficult for the existing infrastructure to safely handle
greater capacities of traffic in all weather conditions. As
a result, the FAA is implementing runway safety systems,
such as Airport Surface Detection Equipment-Model X
(ASDE-X) and Advanced Surface Movement Guidance and
Control System (A-SMGCS) at various airports. The data that
these systems use comes from surface movement radar
and aircraft transponders. The combination of these data
sources allows the systems to determine the position and
identification of aircraft on the airport movement area and
decreases the potential of collisions on airport runways
and taxiways.
Additional information concerning airport lighting,
markings, and signs can be found in the Aeronautical
Information Manual (AIM) and the Pilot’s Handbook of

Runway holding position marking and lights for land and hold short operations (LAHSO)
Figure 1-4. Key airport lighting and markings.
Aeronautical Knowledge, appendix 1, as well as on the FAA’s
website at http://www.faa.gov/airports/runway_safety/.
Airport Signs, Lighting, and Markings
Flight crews use airport lighting, markings, and signs to
help maintain situational awareness. These visual aids
provide information concerning the aircraft’s location on
the airport, the taxiway in use, and the runway entrance
being used. Overlooking this information can lead to
ground accidents that are entirely preventable. If you
encounter unfamiliar markings or lighting, contact ATC
In-pavement runway guard lights
Centerline/lead-on lights
Stop bar at instrument landing system hold position
Painted
holding
position
Broken taxiway edge markings may be crossed
sign
Vehicle lanes
Reporting points
Low
visibility
hold
point
Under ATC
Not under ATC control
control
Taxiway centerline marking
A
A
Taxiway edge marking (do not cross)
Painted taxiway location sign
Painted taxiway direction sign
for clarification and, if necessary, request progressive taxi
instructions. Pilots are encouraged to notify the appropriate
authorities of erroneous, misleading, or decaying signs or
lighting that would contribute to the failure of safe ground
operations.
Runway Incursions
On any given day, the NAS may handle almost 200,000
takeoffs and landings. Due to the complex nature of the
airport environment and the intricacies of the network of
people that make it operate efficiently, the FAA is constantly
1-5

looking to maintain the high standard of safety that exists
at airports today. Runway safety is one of its top priorities.
The FAA defines a runway incursion as: “Any occurrence
at an aerodrome involving the incorrect presence of an
aircraft, vehicle, or person on the protected area of a surface
designated for the landing and takeoff of aircraft.”
The four categories of runway incursions are listed below:
•
Category A—a serious incident in which a collision
was narrowly avoided.
•
Category B—an incident in which separation
decreases and there is a significant potential for
The FAA recommends that you:
•
Receive and understand all NOTAMs, particularly
those concerning airport construction and lighting.
•
Read back, in full, all clearances involving
holding short, line up and wait, and crossing runways
to ensure proper understanding.
•
Abide by the sterile cockpit rule.
•
Develop operational procedures that minimize
distractions during taxiing.
•
Ask ATC for directions if you are lost or unsure of
your position on the airport.
•
Adhere to takeoff and runway crossing clearances in
a timely manner.
•
Position your aircraft so landing traffic can see you.
•
Monitor radio communications to maintain a
situational awareness of other aircraft.
•
Remain on frequency until instructed to change.
•
Make sure you know the reduced runway distances
and whether or not you can comply before accepting
a land and hold short clearance or clearance for
shortened runway.
•
Report confusing airport diagrams to the proper
authorities.
•
Use exterior taxi and landing lights when practical.
NOTE:
The sterile cockpit rule refers to a concept outlined in 14 CFR
Part 121, § 121.542 and 135.100 that requires flight
crews to refrain from engaging in activities that could distract
them from the performance of their duties during critical phases
of flight.
Figure 1-5. FAA recommendations for reducing runway incursions.
collision that may result in a time critical corrective/
evasive response to avoid a collision.
•
Category C—an incident characterized by ample
time and/or distance to avoid a collision.
•
Category D—an incident that meets the definition
1-6
of runway incursion, such as incorrect presence of a
single vehicle/person/aircraft on the protected area
of a surface designated for the landing and takeoff of
aircraft but with no immediate safety consequences.
Figure 1-5 highlights several steps that reduce the chances
of being involved in a runway incursion.
In addition to the SMGCS program, the FAA has implemented
additional programs to reduce runway incursions and other
surface movement issues. They identified runway hotspots,
designed standardized taxi routes, and instituted the
Runway Safety Program.
Runway Hotspots
ICAO defines runway hotspots as a location on an
aerodrome movement area with a history or potential risk
of collision or runway incursion and where heightened
attention by pilots and drivers is necessary. Hotspots
alert pilots to complex or potentially confusing taxiway
geometry that could make surface navigation challenging.
Whatever the reason, pilots need to be aware that
these hazardous intersections exist, and they should
be increasingly vigilant when approaching and taxiing
through these intersections. These hotspots are depicted
on some airport charts as circled areas. [Figure 1-6] The FAA
Office of Runway Safety has links to the FAA regions that
maintain a complete list of airports with runway hotspots
at http://www.faa.gov/airports/runway_safety.
Standardized Taxi Routes
Standard taxi routes improve ground management at high-
density airports, namely those that have airline service. At
these airports, typical taxiway traffic patterns used to move
aircraft between gate and runway are laid out and coded.
The ATC specialist (ATCS) can reduce radio communication
time and eliminate taxi instruction misinterpretation by
simply clearing the pilot to taxi via a specific, named route.
An example of this would be Los Angeles International
Airport (KLAX), where North Route is used to transition
to Runway 24L. [Figure 1-7] These routes are issued by
ground control, and if unable to comply, pilots must
advise ground control on initial contact. If for any reason
the pilot becomes uncertain as to the correct taxi route, a
request should be made for progressive taxi instructions.
These step-by-step routing directions are also issued if the
controller deems it necessary due to traffic, closed taxiways,
airport construction, etc. It is the pilot’s responsibility to
know if a particular airport has preplanned taxi routes, to
be familiar with them, and to have the taxi descriptions in
their possession. Specific information about airports that
use coded taxiway routes is included in the Notices to
Airmen Publication (NTAP).

At Long Beach/Daugherty Field Airport, the following areas have been
designated as hot spots, posing a special challenge to pilots.
HOT6
Landing Runway 30
Be aware that this runway crosses every other available runway
at the airport. When exiting the runway, pilots should make sure
they are turning with a “lead-off” taxiline onto a taxiway and not
onto another active runway.
Figure 1-6. Example of runway hot spots located at Long Beach/Daugherty Field Airport (KLGB).
SAMPLE NOT FOR ACTUAL USE
Standardized Taxi Routes for Los Angeles
International Airport (KLAX)
The following Standardized Taxi routes
may be issued to all taxiing aircraft.
North Route
Taxi via Charlie (C) towards taxiway Sierra (S) taxi northbound on taxiway Sierra (S),
and at Check-point-1 contact Ground Control on frequency 121.65, hold short of
taxiway Delta (D). When advised by the north Ground Control, the North Route
continues on taxiway Echo (E) to Runway 24L or the gate, whichever applies.
South Route
If the aircraft is west of taxiway Romeo (R), taxi eastbound on taxiway Echo (E) and
turn right on taxiway Romeo (R), if the aircraft is east of taxiway Romeo (R), taxi
westbound on taxiway Echo (E) and turn left on taxiway Romeo (R). And at
Check-point-2, contact Ground Control on frequency 121.75, hold short of taxiway
Charlie (C).
West Route
Taxi via taxiway Charlie (C) west-bound, hold short of taxiway Alfa Alfa (AA), contact
Ground Control on frequency 121.65 when number one approaching Taxiway AA.
Bridge Route
Taxi via taxiway Echo (E) then south on taxiway Alfa Alfa (AA), and at Check-point-3
contact Ground Control on frequency 121.75, hold short of taxiway Charlie (C).
(AJV-W2 4/23/2010)
Figure 1-7. Los Angeles International Airport diagram, North Route, and standardized taxi route.
HOT1
Runway 25R and Taxiway D
Aircraft exiting runway 30 at taxiway A turn
left on taxiway D, anticipate reaching their
destination, and fail to hold short of runway
25R.
HOT2
Runway 12 and Taxiway B
Aircraft northbound on taxiway B for departure
on runway 16R at taxiway intersection D miss
the right turn onto taxiway D and enter
runways 12, 7L, and 25R.
HOT3
Runway 25L/7R at Taxiway B
Aircraft southbound on taxiway B anticipate
reaching their destination parking ramp and
fail to hold short of runway 25L/7R.
HOT4
Runway 16R/34L at Taxiway F
Aircraft taxiing to runway 16R from the
southwest ramp miss the left turn onto
taxiway B, continue eastbound onto taxiway
F, and enter runway 16R/34L.
HOT5
Runway 25L at Taxiway D
After completing a runup on inactive runway
34R, aircraft fail to hold short of runway 25L.
SW-3, 29 JUL 2010 to 26 AUG 2010
NOT FOR NAVIGATION
North Route
SW-3, 29 JUL 2010 to 26 AUG 2010
1-7

Taxi and Movement Operations Change
As of June 30, 2010, controllers are required to issue explicit
instructions to cross or hold short of each runway that
intersects a taxi route. Following is a summary of these
procedural changes:
•
“Taxi to” is no longer used when issuing taxi
instructions to an assigned takeoff runway.
•
Instructions to cross a runway are issued one at a
time. Instructions to cross multiple runways are not
issued. An aircraft or vehicle must have crossed the
previous runway before another runway crossing
is issued. This applies to any runway, including
inactive or closed runways.
•
Never cross a runway hold marking without explicit
ATC instructions. If in doubt, ask!
Reminder: You may not enter a runway unless you have
been:
1. Instructed to cross or taxi onto that specific runway;
2. Cleared to take off from that runway; or
3. Instructed to line up and wait on that specific runway.
For more information on the change, refer to FAA Order
JO 7110.65, Air Traffic Control, which can be found at www.
faa.gov.
Weather and the Departure Environment
Takeoff Minimums
While mechanical failure is potentially hazardous during
any phase of flight, a failure during takeoff under
instrument conditions is extremely critical. In the event of
an emergency, a decision must be made to either return to
the departure airport or fly directly to a takeoff alternate. If
the departure weather were below the landing minimums
for the departure airport, the flight would be unable to
return for landing, leaving few options and little time to
reach a takeoff alternate.
In the early years of air transportation, landing minimums
for commercial operators were usually lower than takeoff
minimums. Therefore, it was possible that minimums
allowed pilots to land at an airport but not depart from that
airport. Additionally, all takeoff minimums once included
ceiling, as well as visibility requirements. Today, takeoff
minimums are typically lower than published landing
minimums, and ceiling requirements are only included if
it is necessary to see and avoid obstacles in the departure
area.
1-8
The FAA establishes takeoff minimums for every airport
that has published Standard Instrument Approaches.
These minimums are used by commercially operated
aircraft, namely Part 121 and Part 135 operators. At airports
where minimums are not established, these same carriers
are required to use FAA-designated standard minimums:
1 statute mile (SM) visibility for single- and twin-engine
aircraft, and 1⁄2 SM for helicopters and aircraft with more
than two engines.
Aircraft operating under 14 CFR Part 91 are not required to
comply with established takeoff minimums. Legally, a zero/
zero departure may be made, but it is never advisable. If
commercial pilots who fly passengers on a daily basis must
comply with takeoff minimums, then good judgment and
common sense would tell all instrument pilots to follow
the established minimums as well.
Aeronautical Information Services charts list takeoff
minimums only for the runways at airports that have other
than standard minimums. These takeoff minimums are
listed by airport in alphabetical order in the front of the TPP
booklet. If an airport has non-standard takeoff minimums,
a T (referred to by some as either the “triangle T” or “trouble
T”) is placed in the notes sections of the instrument
procedure chart. In the front of the TPP booklet, takeoff
minimums are listed before the obstacle departure
procedure. Some departure procedures allow a departure
with standard minimums provided specific aircraft
performance requirements are met. [Figure 1-8]
Takeoff Minimums for Commercial Operators
While Part 121 and Part 135 operators are the primary users
of takeoff minimums, they may be able to use alternative
takeoff minimums based on their individual OpSpecs.
Through these OpSpecs, operators are authorized to depart
with lower-than-standard minimums provided they have
the necessary equipment and crew training.
Operations Specifications (OpSpecs)
Within the air transportation industry, there is a need to
establish and administer safety standards to accommodate
many variables. These variables include a wide range
of aircraft, varied operator capabilities, the various
situations requiring different types of air transportation,
and the continual, rapid changes in aviation technology.
It is impractical to address these variables through the
promulgation of safety regulations for each and every
type of air transport situation and the varying degrees of
operator capabilities. Also, it is impractical to address the

Figure 1-8. Examples of non-standard takeoff minimums for Colorado Springs, Colorado.
1-9

rapidly changing aviation technology and environment
through the regulatory process. Safety regulations
would be extremely complex and unwieldy if all possible
variations and situations were addressed by regulation.
Instead, the safety standards established by regulation
should usually have a broad application that allows varying
acceptable methods of compliance. The OpSpecs provide
an effective method for establishing safety standards that
address a wide range of variables. In addition, OpSpecs
can be adapted to a specific certificate holder or operator’s
class and size of aircraft and type and kinds of operations.
OpSpecs can be tailored to suit an individual certificate
holder or operator’s needs.
Part 121 and Part 135 certificate holders have the ability,
through the use of approved OpSpecs, to use lower-than­
standard takeoff minimums. Depending on the equipment
installed in a specific type of aircraft, the crew training, and
the type of equipment installed at a particular airport, these
operators can depart from appropriately equipped runways
with as little as 300 feet RVR. Additionally, OpSpecs outline
provisions for approach minimums, alternate airports, and
weather services in Volume 3 of FAA Order 8900.1, Flight
Standards Information Management System (FSIMS).
NOT FOR NAVIGATION
Figure 1-9. Examples of weather information of various flight
information publications (FLIP).
1-10
Ceiling and Visibility Requirements
All takeoffs and departures have visibility minimums (some
may have minimum ceiling requirements) incorporated
into the procedure. There are a number of methods to
report visibility and a variety of ways to distribute these
reports, including automated weather observations. Flight
crews should always check the weather, including ceiling
and visibility information, prior to departure. Never launch
an IFR flight without obtaining current visibility information
immediately prior to departure. Further, when ceiling and
visibility minimums are specified for IFR departure, both
are applicable.
Weather reporting stations for specific airports across
the country can be located by reviewing the CS. Weather
sources along with their respective phone numbers and
frequencies are listed by airport. Frequencies for weather
sources, such as Automatic Terminal Information Service
(ATIS), Digital Automatic Terminal Information Service
(D-ATIS), Automated Weather Observing System (AWOS),
Automated Surface Observing System (ASOS), and FAA
Automated Flight Service Station (AFSS) are published on
approach charts as well. [Figure 1-9]
Visibility
Visibility is the ability, as determined by atmospheric
conditions and expressed in units of distance, to see
and identify prominent unlighted objects by day and
prominent lighted objects by night. Visibility is reported
as statute miles, hundreds of feet, or meters.
Prevailing Visibility
Prevailing visibility is the greatest horizontal visibility
equaled or exceeded throughout at least half the horizon
circle, which need not necessarily be continuous. Prevailing
visibility is reported in statute miles or fractions of miles.
SE-2, 29 JUL 2010 to 26 AUG 2010
Runway Visibility Value (RVV)
Runway visibility value is the visibility determined for a
particular runway by a transmissometer. A meter provides
Conversion
RVR (feet)
Visibility (sm)
2010 to 26 AUG 2010
1/4
1,600
1/2
2,400
5/8
3,200
3/4
4,000
7/8
4,500
5,000
11/4
6,000
Figure 1-10. RVR conversion table.

continuous indication of the visibility (reported in statute
miles or fractions of miles) for the runway. RVV is used in lieu
of prevailing visibility in determining minimums for a particular
runway.
Tower Visibility
Tower visibility is the prevailing visibility determined from
the airport traffic control tower at locations that also report
the surface visibility.
Runway Visual Range (RVR)
Runway visual range is an instrumentally derived value,
based on standard calibrations, that represents the
horizontal distance a pilot sees down the runway from the
approach end. It is based on the sighting of either high
intensity runway lights or on the visual contrast of other
targets, whichever yields the greater visual range. RVR, in
contrast to prevailing or runway visibility, is based on what
a pilot in a moving aircraft should see looking down the
runway. RVR is horizontal visual range, not slant visual range.
RVR is reported in hundreds of feet, so the values must be
converted to SM if the visibility in SM is not reported. [Figure
1-10] It is based on the measurement of a transmissometer
made near the touchdown point of the instrument runway
and is reported in hundreds of feet. RVR is used in lieu of
RVV and/or prevailing visibility in determining minimums
for a particular runway.
Types of RVR
The following are types of RVR that may be used:
•
Touchdown RVR—the RVR visibility readout values
obtained from RVR equipment serving the runway
touchdown zone.
•
Mid-RVR—the RVR readout values obtained from
RVR equipment located near the runway midpoint .
•
Rollout RVR—the RVR readout values obtained from
RVR equipment located nearest the rollout end of
the runway.
•
Far End RVR—when four RVR visibility sensors (VS)
are installed, the far end RVR VS is the touchdown
RVR VS on the reciprocal runway. The far end sensor
will serve as additional information.
RVR is the primary visibility measurement used by Part
121 and Part 135 operators with specific visibility reports
and controlling values outlined in their respective OpSpecs.
Under their OpSpecs agreements, the operator must have
specific, current RVR reports, if available, to proceed with an
instrument departure. OpSpecs also outline which visibility
report is controlling in various departure scenarios.
Figure 1-11. AWSS installation at Driggs-Reed, Idaho.
Adequate Visual Reference
Another set of lower-than-standard takeoff minimums is
available to Part 121 and Part 135 operations as outlined in
their respective OpSpecs document. When certain types of
visibility reports are unavailable or specific equipment is out
of service, the flight can still depart the airport if the pilot
can maintain adequate visual reference. An appropriate
visual aid must be available to ensure the takeoff surface
can be continuously identified, and directional control can
be maintained throughout the takeoff run. Appropriate
visual aids include high intensity runway lights, runway
centerline lights, runway centerline markings, or other
runway lighting and markings. With adequate visual
references and appropriate OpSpec approval, commercial
operators may take off with a visibility of 1600 RVR or ¼
SM.
Ceilings
Ceiling is the height above the earth’s surface of the lowest
layer of clouds or obscuring phenomena that is reported as
broken, overcast, or obscuration and not classified as thin
or partial.
1-11

Automated Weather Systems
An automated weather system consists of any of the
automated weather sensor platforms that collect weather
data at airports and disseminate the weather information
via radio and/or landline. The systems consist of the ASOS/
Automated Weather Sensor System (AWSS) and the AWOS.
SAMPLE NOT FOR ACTUAL USE
WEATHER DATA SOURCES: AWOS-3 119.675 (704) 735-6954.
AWOS/ASOS/AWSS information
Figure 1-12. CS entry for an AWOS station.
These systems are installed and maintained at airports
across the United States by both government (FAA and
National Weather Service (NWS)) and private entities. They
are relatively inexpensive to operate because they require
no outside observer, and they provide invaluable weather
information for airports without operating control towers.
[Figure 1-11]
AWOS and ASOS/AWSS offer a wide variety of capabilities
and progressively broader weather reports. Automated
systems typically transmit weather every one to two
minutes so the most up-to-date weather information is
constantly broadcast. Basic AWOS includes only altimeter
setting, wind speed, wind direction, temperature, and dew
point information. More advanced systems, such as the
ASOS/AWSS and AWOS-3, are able to provide additional
information, such as wind speed, wind gust, wind direction,
variable wind direction, temperature, dew point, altimeter
setting, and density altitude. ASOS/AWSS stations providing
service levels A or B also report RVR. The specific type
of equipment found at a given facility is listed in the CS.
[Figure 1-12]
The use of the aforementioned visibility reports and
weather services are not limited for Part 91 operators.
Part 121 and 135 operators are bound by their individual
OpSpecs documents and are required to use weather
reports that come from the NWS or other approved
sources. While every operator’s specifications are
individually tailored, most operators are required to use
ATIS, RVR reports, and selected reports from automated
weather stations. All reports coming from an AWOS-3
station are usable for Part 121 and Part 135 operators. Each
1-12
type of automated station has different levels of approval
as outlined in individual OpSpecs. Ceiling and visibility
reports given by the tower with the departure information
are always considered official weather, and RVR reports are
typically the controlling visibility reference.
Automatic Terminal Information Service (ATIS)
ATIS is another valuable tool for gaining weather
information. ATIS is available at most airports that have an
operating control tower, which means the reports on the
ATIS frequency are only available during the regular hours
of tower operation. At some airports that operate part-time
towers, ASOS/AWSS information is broadcast over the
ATIS frequency when the tower is closed. This service is
available only at those airports that have both an ASOS/
AWSS on the field and an ATIS-ASOS/AWSS interface switch
installed in the tower.
Each ATIS report includes crucial information about
runways and instrument approaches in use, specific
outages, and current weather conditions including
visibility. Visibility is reported in statute miles and may
be omitted if the visibility is greater than five miles. ATIS
weather information comes from a variety of sources
depending on the particular airport and the equipment
installed there. The reported weather may come from a
manual weather observer, weather instruments located
in the tower, or from automated weather stations. This
information, no matter the origin, must be from NWS
approved weather sources for it to be used in the ATIS
report.
Digital Automatic Terminal Information Service
(D-ATIS)
The digital ATIS (D-ATIS) is an alternative method of
receiving ATIS reports. The service provides text messages
to aircraft, airlines, and other users outside the standard
reception range of conventional ATIS via landline and data
link communications to the flight deck. Aircraft equipped
with data link services are capable of receiving ATIS
information over their Aircraft Communications Addressing
and Reporting System (ACARS) unit. This allows the pilots to
read and print out the ATIS report inside the aircraft, thereby
increasing report accuracy and decreasing pilot workload.
Also, the service provides a computer-synthesized voice
message that can be transmitted to all aircraft within
range of existing transmitters. The Terminal Data Link
System (TDLS) D-ATIS application uses weather inputs
from local automated weather sources or manually entered
meteorological data together with preprogrammed menus
to provide standard information to users. Airports with
D-ATIS capability are listed in the CS.

INSTRUMENT APPROACH PROCEDURE CHARTS
IFR ALTERNATE AIRPORT MINIMUMS
Standard alternate minimums for non precision approaches are 800-2 (NDB, VOR, LOC, TACAN, LDA,
Other-than-standard IFR alternate minimums are published.
VORTAC, VOR/DME, ASR or WAAS LNAV); for precision approaches 600-2 (ILS or PAR). Airports within
NOT FOR NAVIGATION
this geographical area that require alternate minimums other than standard or alternate minimums with
restrictions are listed below. NA - means alternate minimums are not authorized due to unmonitored facility
or absence of weather reporting service. Civil pilots see FAR 91. IFR Alternate Airport Minimums: Ceiling
and Visibility Minimums not applicable to USA/USN/USAF. Pilots must review the IFR Alternate Airport
Minimums Notes for alternate airfield suitability.
NAME
ALTERNATE MINIMUMS
NAME
ALTERNATE MINIMUMS
AKRON, CO
COLORADO SPRINGS, CO
CITY OF COLORADO SPRINGS
COLORADO
MUNI .............................. ILS or LOC Rwy 17L
PLAINS RGNL ................. RNAV (GPS) Rwy 11
ILS or LOC Rwy 35L
NA when local weather not available.
ILS or LOC Rwy 35R
ALAMOSA, CO
RNAV (GPS) Y Rwy 17L
SAMPLE NOT FOR ACTUAL USE
RNAV (GPS) Y Rwy 17R 4
SAN LUIS VALLEY RGNL/
RNAV (RNP) Z Rwy 17R5
BERGMAN FIELD .............. RNAV (GPS) Rwy 2
RNAV (GPS) Rwy 20
Categories A, B, 900-2; Category C, 900-2 ;
Category D, 900-2 .
NA when local weather not available.
ILS, Category D, 700-2.
ALBUQUERQUE, NM
NA when local weather not available.
23 SEP 2010 to 21 OCT 2010
23 SEP 2010 to 21 OCT 2010
4Categories A, B, 1100-2; Categories C, D,
ALBUQUERQUE INTL
SUNPORT ..................... VOR or TACAN Rwy 8
1100-3.
5Categories A, B, C, D, 800-2 .
Categories A,B, 900-2; Category C, 900-2 ;
Category D, 900-2 ; Category E, 900-3.
CORTEZ, CO
City and state location
CLAYTON, NM
CORTEZ MUNI ............ RNAV (GPS) Y Rwy 21
Airport name and applicable approach
RNAV (GPS) Z Rwy 21
CLAYTON MUNI AIRPARK ............ NDB Rwy 2
VOR Rwy 21
NDB Rwy 20
RNAV (GPS) Rwy 2
Category D, 900-3.
Other-than-standard IFR alternate minimums
RNAV (GPS) Rwy 20
Categories A, B, 1300-2; Categories C, D,
1300-3.
NA when local weather not available.
Categories A, B, 900-2; Category C, 900-2 ,
CRAIG, CO
Category D, 900-2 .
CRAIG-MOFFAT .................... VOR/DME Rwy 7
Category D, 800-2 .
VOR Rwy 25
Figure 1-13. Examples of IFR alternate minimums.
It is important to remember that ATIS information is
The requirement for an alternate depends on the aircraft
updated hourly and anytime a significant change in the
category, equipment installed, approach navigational aid
weather occurs. As a result, the information is not the most
(NAVAID), and forecast weather. For example, airports with
current report available. Prior to departing the airport, you
only a global positioning system (GPS) approach procedure
need to get the latest weather information from the tower.
cannot be used as an alternate by TSO-C129 or C196 users
ASOS/AWSS and AWOS also provide a source of current
unless certain requirements are met (see AIM) even
weather, but their information should not be substituted
though the "N/A" has been removed from the approach
for weather reports from the tower.
chart. For select area navigation (RNAV) GPS and GPS
approach procedures, the "N/A" is being removed so they
IFR Alternate Requirements
may be used as an alternate by aircraft equipped with an
approach-approved Wide Area Augmentation System
On Aeronautical Information Services charts, standard
(WAAS) receiver complaying with (TSO-C145 or C146)
alternate minimums are not published. If the airport has
or TSO-C129 or C196 meeitng certain requirements (see
other than standard alternate minimums, they are listed
AIM). Because GPS is not authorized as a substitute means
in the front of the approach chart booklet. The presence
of navigation guidance when conducting a conventional
of a triangle with an A on the approach chart indicates
approach at an alternate airport, if the approach procedure
the listing of alternate minimums should be consulted.
requires either distance measuring equipment (DME) or
Airports that do not qualify for use as an alternate airport
automatic direction finder (ADF), the aircraft must be
are designated with an A N/A. [Figure 1-13]
equipped with the appropriate DME or ADF avionics in
order to use the approach as an alternate.
1-13

For aircraft other than helicopters, 14 CFR Part 91
requirements, an alternate airport must be listed on IFR
flight plans if the forecast weather at the destination
airport, for at least one hour before and for one hour after
the estimated time of arrival (ETA), the ceiling is less than
2,000 feet above the airport elevation, and the visibility
is less than 3 SM. One way to remember the rules for
determining the necessity of filing an alternate is the “1, 2,
3 Rule.” For helicopters, similar alternate filing requirements
in 14 CFR Part 91 apply. An alternate must be listed on an
IFR flight plan if at the ETA and for one hour after the ETA,
the ceiling is at least 1,000 feet above the airport elevation,
or at least 400 feet above the lowest applicable approach
minima, whichever is higher, and the visibility is at least
2 SM.
Not all airports can be used as alternate airports. An airport
may not be qualified for alternate use if the airport NAVAID
is unmonitored, or if it does not have weather reporting
capabilities. For an airport to be used as an alternate,
the forecast weather at that airport must meet certain
qualifications at the ETA. For aircraft other than helicopters,
standard alternate minimums for a precision approach are
a 600-foot ceiling and a 2 SM visibility. For a non-precision
approach, the minimums are an 800-foot ceiling and a 2 SM
visibility. Standard alternate minimums apply unless higher
alternate minimums are listed for an airport. For helicopters,
alternate weather minimums are a ceiling of 200 feet above
the minimum for the approach to be flown, and visibility
at least 1 SM but never less than the minimum visibility for
the approach to be flown.
Alternate Minimums for Commercial Operators
IFR alternate minimums for Part 121 and Part 135 operators
are very specific and have more stringent requirements
than Part 91 operators.
Part 121 operators are required by their OpSpecs and 14
CFR Part 121, § 121.617 and 121.625 to have a takeoff
alternate airport for their departure airport in addition
to their airport of intended landing if the weather at the
departure airport is below the landing minimums in the
certificate holder’s OpSpecs for that airport. The alternate
must be within two hours flying time for an aircraft with
three or more engines with an engine out in normal cruise
in still air. For two engine aircraft, the alternate must be
within one hour. The airport of intended landing may be
used in lieu of an alternate provided that it meets all the
requirements. Domestic Part 121 operators must also file
for alternate airports when the weather at their destination
airport, from one hour before to one hour after their ETA, is
forecast to be below a 2,000-foot ceiling and/or less than
three miles visibility.
1-14
For alternate airports with at least one operational
navigational facility that provides a straight-in non-
precision approach, a straight-in precision approach, or a
circling maneuver from an instrument approach procedure
determine the ceiling and visibility by:
•
Adding 400 feet to the authorized CAT I height above
airport (HAA)/height above touchdown elevation
(HAT) for ceiling.
•
Adding one mile to the authorized CAT I visibility
for visibility minimums.
This is one example of the criteria required for Part 121
operators when calculating minimums. Part 135 operators
are also subject to their own specific rules regarding the
selection and use of alternate minimums as outlined in their
OpSpecs and 14 CFR Part 135, § 135.219 through 135.225,
which are similar to those used by Part 121 operators with
additional considerations.
Commercial operators typically use dispatchers to plan
flights, including selecting and filing alternate airports.
The dispatcher considers aircraft performance, aircraft
equipment and its condition, and route of flight when
choosing alternates. In the event changes need to be
made to the flight plan en route due to deteriorating
weather, the dispatcher maintains contact with the flight
crew and reroutes their flight as necessary. Therefore, it is
the pilot’s responsibility to execute the flight as planned
by the dispatcher. To aid in the planning of alternates,
dispatchers have a list of airports that are approved as
alternates so they can quickly determine which airports
should be used for a particular flight. Dispatchers also
use flight planning software that plans routes including
alternates for the flight. This type of software is tailored
for individual operators and includes their normal flight
paths and approved airports. Flight planning software and
services are provided through private sources.
Though the pilot is the final authority for the flight
and ultimately has full responsibility, the dispatcher is
responsible for creating flight plans that are accurate and
comply with the CFRs. Alternate minimum criteria are only
used as planning tools to ensure the pilot in command and
dispatcher are thinking ahead to the approach phase of
flight. In the event the flight would actually need to divert
to an alternate, the published approach minimums or
lower-than-standard minimums must be used as addressed
in OpSpecs documents.

Previous TERPS Departure Procedures
Positive course guidance must be acquired
within 10 NM for straight departures and
within 5 NM for departures requiring turns.
V186
Required climb gradient of 200 ft/NM
400 feet
96 feet
96 feet
Obstacle clearance surface (OCS)
200 feet
' '
304 feet
304 feet
152 feet
152 feet
35 feet
35 feet
10 NM
1 NM
2 NM
Figure 1-14. Previous TERPS departure procedures.
Aircraft reaches en route obstacle
Beyond the diverse obstacle assessment
clearance of 1,000' (nonmountainous
area (25/46 NM) there might be significantly
areas) or 2,000' (in mountainous areas).
higher obstacles.
25/46 NM
TERPS Design CG of 200 ft/NM
40:1 OIS at 152 ft/NM
4NM
Figure 1-15. Diverse Departure Obstacle Assessment to 25/46 NM.
1-15

TERPS Departure Procedures and
runway distance available terms.
Start End of Runway (SER)
The beginning of the takeoff runway available.
Approach End of Runway (AER)
The first portion of the runway available for landing.
If the runway threshold is displaced, the displaced
threshold latitude/longitude is the AER.
V186
Minimum assumed“at or above”
400 feet
Required climb
gradient of 200 ft/NM
Slope of 152 ft/NM or 40:1
intended aircraft climb path
96 feet
96 feet
Landing Distance Available (LDA)
The length of runway that is declared available and
suitable for the ground run of an airplane landing.
200 feet
Obstacle clearance
surface (OCS)
304 feet
304 feet
48 '
48 '
152 feet
152 feet
35 feet
35 feet
Runway
Centerline Extended
1 NM
2 NM
Departure End of Runway (DER)
The end of runway available for the ground run of an aircraft
departure. The end of the runway that is opposite the landing
Positive Course Guidance (PCG)
threshold, sometimes referred to as the stop end of the runway.
A continuous display of navigational data
that enables an aircraft to be flown along a
specific course line (e.g., radar vector,
Takeoff Runway Available (TORA)
Takeoff Distance Available (TODA)
RNAV, ground-based NAVAID). PCG must
The length of runway declared available and suitable
The length of the takeoff runway available plus
be acquired within 10 NM for straight
for the ground run of an airplane takeoff.
the length of the clearway, if provided.
departures and within 5 NM for departures
requiring turns.
TORA
First
Clearway
Initial Climb Area (ICA)
Significant
The ICA is the segment of the departure procedure that
Obstacle
75 Meters
starts at the DER and proceeds along the runway
(247 Feet)
centerline extended to allow the aircraft sufficient distance
TODA
to reach an altitude of 400 feet above DER elevation and
Accelerate-Stop Distance Available
to allow the establishment of positive course guidance by
Stopway
TORA
(ASDA)
all navigation systems. A typical straight departure ICA
The runway plus stopway length
extends 2-5 NM from the DER along the runway centerline
declared available and suitable for
extended. It is 500 feet wide each side of the runway
the acceleration and deceleration
centerline at DER, then spreads out at 15°.
of an airplane aborting a takeoff.
ASDA
Figure 1-16. New TERPS departure procedures.
Departure Procedures
based on the pilot crossing the departure end of the runway
(DER) at least 35 feet above the DER elevation, climbing to
Instrument departure procedures are preplanned IFR
400 feet above the DER elevation before making the initial
procedures that provide obstruction clearance from
turn, and maintaining a minimum climb gradient of 200 ft/
the terminal area to the appropriate en route structure.
NM, unless required to level off by a crossing restriction,
Primarily, these procedures are designed to provide obstacle
until the minimum IFR altitude is reached. Following ODP
protection for departing aircraft. There are two types of
assessment, a SID may still be established for the purposes
Departure Procedures (DPs):
of ATC flow management, system enhancement, or noise
•
Obstacle Departure Procedures (ODPs) and
abatement.
•
Standard Instrument Departures (SIDs).
Design Criteria
When an instrument approach is initially developed for an
The design of a departure procedure is based on FAA Order
airport, the need for an ODP is assessed. If an aircraft may
8260.3, United States Standard for Terminal Instrument
turn in any direction from a runway within the limits of the
Procedures (TERPS), which is a living document that is
assessment area and remain clear of obstacles that runway
updated frequently. Departure design criterion begins
passes what is called a diverse departure assessment, and
with the assumption of an initial climb of 200 ft/NM after
no ODP is published. A diverse departure assessment
crossing the DER at a height of at least 35 feet. [Figure 1-14]
ensures that a prescribed, expanding amount of required
The aircraft climb path assumption provides a minimum of
obstacle clearance (ROC) is achieved during the climb-out
35 feet of additional obstacle clearance above the required
until the aircraft can obtain a minimum 1,000 feet ROC in
obstacle clearance (ROC), from the DER outward, to absorb
non-mountainous areas or a minimum 2,000 feet ROC in
variations ranging from the distance of the static source to
mountainous areas. Unless specified otherwise, required
the landing gear, to differences in establishing the minimum
obstacle clearance for all departures, including diverse, is
200 ft/NM climb gradient, etc. The ROC is the planned
1-16

separation between the obstacle clearance surface (OCS)
and the required climb gradient of 200 ft/NM. The ROC
value is zero at the DER elevation and increases along the
departure route until the ROC value appropriate for en route
flight is achieved. The appropriate ROC value for en route
operations is typically achieved about 25 NM for 1,000 feet
of ROC in non-mountainous areas, and 46 NM for 2,000 feet
of ROC in mountainous areas.
If taking off from a runway using a diverse departure
(a runway without a published ODP), beyond these
distances the pilot is responsible for obstacle clearance if
not operating on a published route, and if below the MEA
or MOCA of a published route, or below an ATC-assigned
altitude. [Figure 1-15]
Recent changes in TERPS criteria make the OCS lower and
more restrictive. [Figure 1-16] However, there are many
departures today that were evaluated under the old criteria
that allowed some obstacle surfaces to be as high as 35 feet
at the DER. [Figure 1-14] Since there is no way for the pilot
to determine whether the departure was evaluated using
the previous or current criteria, and until all departures
have been evaluated using the current criteria, pilots need
to be very familiar with the departure environment and
associated obstacles, especially if crossing the DER at less
than 35 feet.
All departure procedures are initially assessed for obstacle
clearance based on a 40:1 Obstacle Clearance Surface (OCS).
If no obstacles penetrate this 40:1 OCS, the standard 200
ft/NM climb gradient provides a minimum of 48 ft/NM of
clearance above objects that do not penetrate the slope.
The departure design must also include the acquisition
of positive course guidance (PCG), typically within 5 to 10
NM of the DER for straight departures. Even when aircraft
performance greatly exceeds the minimum climb gradient,
the published departure routing must always be flown.
Airports publish the declared distances in the A/FD section
of the CS. These include takeoff runway available (TORA),
takeoff distance available (TODA), accelerate-stop distance
available (ASDA), and landing distance available (LDA). These
distances are calculated by adding to the full length of paved
runway any applicable clearway or stop-way and subtracting
from that sum the sections of the runway unsuitable for
satisfying the required takeoff run, takeoff, accelerate/stop,
or landing distance as shown in Figure 1-16.
Optimally, the 40 to 1 slope would work for every departure
design; however, due to terrain and manmade obstacles,
it is often necessary to use alternative requirements to
accomplish a safe, obstacle-free departure design. In
such cases, the design of the departure may incorporate a
climb gradient greater than 200 ft/NM, an increase in the
standard takeoff minimums to allow the aircraft to “see and
avoid” the obstacles, a standard climb of 200 ft/NM with a
specified reduced takeoff length, or a combination of these
options and a specific departure route.
If a departure route is specified, it must be flown in
conjunction with the other options.
The obstacle environment may require a climb gradient
greater than 200 ft/NM. In these cases, the ROC provided
above obstacles is equivalent to 24 percent of the
published climb gradient. The required climb gradient,
for obstacle purposes on ODPs and SIDs, is obtained by
using the formulas:
Standard Formula
DoD Option*
CG = O – E
CG = (48D + O) – E
0.76 D
D
O = obstacle mean sea level (MSL) elevation
E = climb gradient starting MSL elevation
D = distance (NM) from DER to the obstacle
Examples:
2049 – 1221
(48 × 3.1 + 2049) – 1221
= 351.44
= 315.10
0.76 × 3.1
3.1
Round to 352 ft/NM
Round to 316 ft/NM
*Military only
These formulas are published in FAA Order 8260.3 for
calculating the required climb gradient to clear obstacles.
The following formula is used for calculating SID climb
gradients for other than obstacles (i.e., ATC requirements):
CG = A – E
D
A = “climb to” altitude
E = climb gradient starting MSL elevation
D = distance (NM) from the beginning of the climb
Example:
3000 – 1221 = 355.8 round to 356 ft/NM
Note: The climb gradient must be equal to or greater than
the gradient required for obstacles along the route of flight.
The published climb gradient, obstacle or otherwise, is
1-17

Ground speed is 180 knots.
Required climb gradient of 297 ft/NM.
Figure 1-17. Rate of climb table.
treated as a plane which must not be penetrated from
above until reaching the stated height or has reached
the en route environment (e.g., above the MEA, MOCA).
Departure design, including climb gradients, does not
take into consideration the performance of the aircraft; it
only considers obstacle protection for all aircraft. TERPS
criteria assume the aircraft is operating with all available
engines and systems fully functioning. Development of
contingency procedures, required to cover the case of
an engine failure, engine out procedures (EOPs) or other
emergency in flight that may occur after liftoff, is the
responsibility of the operator. When a climb gradient is
required for a specific departure, it is vital that pilots fully
understand the performance of their aircraft and determine
1-18
SAMPLE NOT FOR ACTUAL USE
Given the parameters, you would need to climb at a rate
of 892 fpm to maintain the required climb gradient.
if it can comply with the required climb. The standard
climb of 200 ft/NM is not an issue for most aircraft. When
an increased climb gradient is specified due to obstacle
issues, it is important to calculate aircraft performance,
particularly when flying out of airports at higher altitudes
on warm days. To aid in the calculations, the front matter
of every TPP booklet contains a rate of climb table that
relates specific climb gradients and typical groundspeeds.
[Figure 1-17].
Low, Close-In Obstacles
Obstacles that are located within 1 NM of the DER and
penetrate the 40:1 OCS are referred to as “low, close-in
obstacles” and are also included in the TPP. These obstacles

TUAL USE
L2
TAKE-OFFMINIMUMS AND (OBSTACLE)DEPARTUREPROCEDURES
SAMPLE NOT FOR ACTUAL
AUBURN,CA
BISHOP, CA
40 AGL/1559 MSL.
Rwy30,multiplepoles,building,andterrainbeginning
AUBURN MUNI (AUN)
EASTERN
SIERRA
RGN
L
66'fromdepartureendofrunway,228'leftof
centerline,
BEALE AFB (KBAB)
upto65'
MSL.
AGL/225'
Multiple poles beginning 949'
23 SEP 2010 to 21 OCT 2010
MARYSVILLE, CA. . . . . . . . . .ORIG, 09155
from departure end of runway, 28' right of centerline, up
23 SEP 2010 to 21 OCT 2010
to 42' AGL/103' MSL.
DEPARTURE PROCEDURE: Rwy 15, Climb on a
Rwy33,
CHICO, CA
DER.
CHICO MUNI
TAKE-OFF OBSTACLES: Rwy 33,
DEPARTURE PROCEDURE: Rwys 13L/R, climbing
right turn. Rwys 31L/R,climbing left turn. All aircraft,
climb via CIC R-205 to JINGO Int. Aircraft departing
BECKWOURTH,CA
NERVINO
inbound)to depart JINGO Int at orabove 2800.
TAKE-OFF MINIMUMS: Rwys 7, 25, 3500-3 for climb in
CLOVERDALE, CA
visual conditions.
DEPARTURE PROCEDURE: Rwys 7, 25, for climb in
CLOVERDALE MUNI
visual conditions: cross Nervino Airport at or above
TAKE-OFF MINIMUMS: Rwy 14, 400-2 or std. with a
8300before proceeding oncourse.
min. climb of 280' per NM to 1500, then a min. climb of
NOTE: Rwy 7,road58' from departure end of runway,
260' per NM to 3900. Rwy 32, NA.
469' right of centerline, 15' AGL/4920' MSL. Pole 310'
DEPARTURE PROCEDURE: Rwy 14, climb direct STS
from departure end ofrunway,522'rightof centerline,
VOR/DME. Continue climb in holding pattern (NW
49'AGL/4925'MSL P l 528'f
d
t
d f
Figure 1-18. Examples of takeoff minimums obstacle clearance.
Takeoff distance
Takeoff flight path
Climb
1,500 ft
First
Second
Third
Final
seg.
segment
segment
segment
Regulatory
performance
reduction
35 ft
35 ft
35 ft
BR
VEF V1 VR VLOF
V2
Acceleration
VFTO
N
One engine inoperative
Figure 1-19. Part 25 turbine-powered, transport category airplane OEI actual (gross) takeoff flight path and OEI net takeoff flight path.
1-19

are less than 200 feet above the DER elevation, within 1 NM
of the runway end, and do not require increased takeoff
minimums. The standard ROC to clear these obstacles
would require a climb gradient greater than 200 ft/NM
for a very short distance, only until the aircraft was 200
feet above the DER. To eliminate publishing an excessive
climb gradient, the obstacle above ground level (AGL)/
MSL height and location relative to the DER is noted in the
Takeoff Minimums and (Obstacle) Departure Procedures
section of a given TPP booklet. The purpose of this note
is to identify the obstacle and alert the pilot to the height
and location of the obstacle so they can be avoided. This
can be accomplished in a variety of ways:
•
The pilot may be able to see the obstruction and
maneuver around the obstacle(s) if necessary;
•
Early liftoff/climb performance may allow the aircraft
to cross well above the obstacle(s);
•
If the obstacle(s) cannot be visually acquired during
departure, preflight planning should take into account
what turns or other maneuver(s) may be necessary
immediately after takeoff to avoid the obstruction(s).
These obstacles are especially critical to aircraft that do not
lift off until close to the DER or which climb at the minimum
rate. [Figure 1-18]
One-Engine-Inoperative (OEI) Takeoff Obstacle
Clearance Requirements
Large and turbine-powered, multiengine transport
category airplanes and commuter category airplanes
operated under Part 121 or Part 135 have additional takeoff
obstacle clearance requirements beyond the scope of the
IFR departure procedure requirements addressed by TERPS.
Part 25 transport category and Part 23 commuter category
airplane certification rules define the one-engine­
inoperative (OEI) takeoff flight path, which is normally
constructed from a series of segments beginning from 35
feet above the runway surface at the end of the OEI takeoff
distance and ending at a minimum height of 1,500 feet
above the runway elevation. However, the OEI net takeoff
flight path assessment may continue above 1,500 feet if
necessary to ensure obstacle clearance.
The actual, or gross, OEI flight path represents the vertical
OEI climb profile that the aircraft has been demonstrated
capable of achieving using takeoff procedures developed
for line operations based on the aircraft’s weight,
configuration, and environmental conditions at the time
of takeoff. The OEI net takeoff flight path represents the
actual OEI takeoff flight path that has been degraded by
an amount specified by the certification rules to provide
1-20
a safety margin for expected variations under operational
conditions. Subpart I of Part 121 and Part 135 require that
the OEI net takeoff flight path be at least 35 feet above
obstacles that are located within the prescribed lateral
distance either side of the flight path The actual obstacle
clearance capability, under optimum conditions after
experiencing an engine failure on takeoff, is equal to the
difference between gross and net flight path, plus the
additional 35 feet. [Figure 1-19]
Advisory Circular (AC) 120-91, Airport Obstacle Analysis,
provides guidance and acceptable criteria for use in
determining the safe lateral clearance from obstacles,
when developing takeoff and initial climb out airport
obstacle analyses and engine out obstacle avoidance
procedures to comply with the intent of these regulatory
requirements. Pilots departing an airport under IFR and
operating under Part 121 or 135 are required by 14 CFR
91.175(f )(4) to use an engine-inoperative takeoff obstacle
clearance or avoidance procedure that assures compliance
with the obstacle clearance requirements (subpart I)
of those rules. The assessment of OEI takeoff obstacle
clearance is separate and independent of the IFR departure
procedure and associated all-engines-operating climb
gradient requirements. While the Part 91 operating rules
governing large, commuter, and turbine-powered aircraft
do not require the use of an OEI takeoff obstacle clearance
or avoidance procedure, such use is encouraged for Part
91 operators of these aircraft.
Unlike TERPS, which assesses obstacle clearance beginning
at the DER, the OEI net takeoff flight path obstacle
assessment begins at the point where the aircraft reaches
35 feet above the runway at the end of the OEI takeoff
distance. Therefore, the OEI net takeoff flight path
assessment may begin before the DER allowing for the
use of a portion of the runway for the OEI climb. The OEI
net takeoff flight path obstacle clearance assessment must
also account for clearance of the low, close-in obstacles
that are noted on the IFR departure procedure, but are not
necessarily cleared when complying with the TERPS-based
IFR climb gradient.
The OEI net takeoff flight path is unique for each aircraft
type and is assessed on each takeoff for the required
obstacle clearance directly against those obstacles located
beneath the OEI flight track and within the prescribed
lateral distance from the flight path centerline. TERPS, on
the other hand, provides a required climb gradient that
represents a surface that the aircraft’s all-engines-operating
climb profile must remain above throughout the IFR
climb until reaching the en route environment. These two
methods of assessing obstacle clearance are necessarily
quite different. TERPS is used by the procedure designer

KAPA/APA
Sample Aircraft
Runway Conditions: Dry
Engine Type
Flaps 0
Denver - Centennial
Max Structural Takeoff Weight Limit = 28000
Elevation = 5883 ft
SEC.
Runways - lbs
SEG.
N1
A/1
OAT
17L
17R
35L
35R
CLIMB
F
C
ON
98.91
97.11
21880 R
29380 C
25250 R
21210 R
26690 R
29460 C
98.73
21750 R
29340 C
25070 R
21090 R
26500 R
29460 C
98.56
21620 R
29190 C
24900 R
20950 R
26310 R
29460 C
98.47
21550 R
29100 C
24820 R
20890 R
26210 R
29460 C
98.29
21420 R
28950 O
24650 R
20750 R
26020 R
29460 C
98.11
21290 R
28790 O
24490 R
20620 R
25830 R
29460 C
97.95
21160 R
28620 O
24320 R
20490 R
25650 R
29360 C
97.80
21020 R
28450 O
24160 R
20360 R
25460 R
29210 C
97.72
20960 R
28360 O
24080 R
20300 R
25370 R
29120 C
97.56
20820 R
28170 O
23930 R
20170 R
25180 R
28870 R
97.40
20670 R
27980 O
23770 R
20030 R
25000 R
28630 R
97.20
20530 R
27720 O
23610 R
19880 R
24810 R
28380 R
97.00
20380 R
27460 O
23420 O
19740 R
24630 R
28110 R
96.90
20310 R
27370 R
23340 O
19670 R
24530 R
27970 R
96.70
20170 R
27110 R
23170 O
19530 R
24350 R
27690 R
96.50
20020 R
26860 R
22990 O
19390 R
24150 R
27390 R
96.24
19880 R
26590 R
22810 O
19240 R
23960 R
27100 R
95.97
19710 R
26330 R
22630 O
19070 R
23760 R
26800 R
95.84
19630 R
26190 R
22540 O
18990 R
23660 R
26650 R
95.58
19460 R
25920 R
22320 O
18820 R
23460 R
26350 R
95.31
19290 R
25610 R
22120 O
18650 R
23260 R
26050 C
95.04
19130 R
25300 R
21930 O
18490 R
23070 R
25740 C
94.77
18980 R
24990 R
21730 O
0 R
22870 R
25440 C
94.64
18900 R
24840 R
21630 O
0 R
22770 R
25290 C
94.37
18740 R
24530 R
21440 O
0 R
22570 R
24990 C
94.10
18590 R
24220 R
21240 O
0 R
22380 R
24690 C
--­
Length = ft
RUNWAY DIM
–0.62
0.9
0.93
0.62
–0.93
–0.9
--­
Slope = %
ft
LVLOFF ALT
--­
lbs/kt hw
--­
WIND CORR
lbs/kt tw
N/A
–254
–227
N/A
–223
–131
--­
lbs/.1"Hg > 29.92
QNH
lbs/.1"Hg < 29.92
–87
–127
–99
–86
–113
–114
–123
lbs
ANTI-ICE
–1210
–1400
–1480
–1180
–1690
–830
–70
R = RUNWAY LIMIT
O = OBSTACLE LIMIT
B = BRAKE LIMIT
C = CLIMB LIMIT
LIMIT CODES
FOR SAMPLE USE ONLY
DATE: 07/01/2011
Figure 1-20. Airport/runway analysis example.
1-21

to determine a lateral path that is usable by a wide variety
of aircraft types, and establishes a clearance plane that
aircraft must be able to stay above to fly the procedure. A
Part 25 transport category and Part 23 commuter category
aircraft’s OEI takeoff flight path is established by or on
behalf of the operator for a particular aircraft type and then
limit weights are determined that assure clearance of any
obstacles under that flight path (or within the prescribed
lateral distance from the flight path centerline).
It may be necessary for pilots and operators of these
categories of aircraft to use the services of an aircraft
performance engineer or airport/runway analysis service
provider as means of compliance with the requirements
of Part 121 subpart I, or Part 135 subpart I concerning
OEI net takeoff flight obstacle clearance and takeoff field
length requirements. [Figure 1-20] Airport/runway analysis
involves the complex, usually computerized, computations
of aircraft performance, using extensive airport/obstacle
databases and terrain information. This yields maximum
Figure 1-21. Graphic ODP/booklet front matter.
1-22
allowable takeoff and landing weights for particular
aircraft/engine configurations for a specific airport, runway,
and range of temperatures. The computations also consider
flap settings, various aircraft characteristics, runway
conditions, obstacle clearance, and weather conditions.
Obstacle data also is available from these service providers
for operators who desire to perform their own analysis
using the OEI climb performance and flight path data
furnished in the Airplane Flight Manual or when using an
aircraft electronic performance program supplied by the
manufacturer or other service provider.
Airport/runway analysis is typically based on the
assumption that the pilot will fly a straight-out departure
following an engine failure on takeoff. However, when a
straight-out departure is not practical or recommended,
a special OEI turn procedure can be developed for each
applicable runway. This OEI turn procedure may follow
the path of a published IFR departure procedure or it
may follow an independent path designed to avoid

otherwise onerous obstacles and thereby maximize the
allowable takeoff weight and payload. Graphic depiction
of the OEI procedure is often available to give the pilot a
pictorial representation of the special OEI procedure. An
engine failure during takeoff is a non-normal condition;
therefore, the actions taken by the pilot including the use
of an OEI turn procedure takes precedence over noise
abatement, air traffic, SIDs, DPs, and other normal operating
considerations.
It must be understood that the airport/runway analysis
assesses obstacle clearance using the OEI net takeoff flight
path data provided in the Airplane Flight Manual and the
selected lateral obstacle assessment area. A takeoff weight
limit provided on the analysis does not necessarily ensure
compliance with the all-engines-operating climb gradient
published on an IFR departure procedure even if the
track of the OEI special procedure and the IFR departure
procedure are identical.
Categories of Departure Procedures
There are two types of DPs: those developed to assist
pilots in obstruction avoidance, known as ODPs, printed
either textually or graphically, and those developed
to communicate ATC clearances, SIDs, always printed
graphically.
Obstacle Departure Procedures (ODPs)
The term ODP is used to define procedures that simply
provide obstacle clearance. ODPs are only used for
obstruction clearance and do not include ATC-related
climb requirements. In fact, the primary emphasis of ODP
design is to use the least restrictive route of flight to the
en route structure or to facilitate a climb to an altitude
that allows random (diverse) IFR flight, while attempting
to accommodate typical departure routes.
An ODP must be developed when obstructions penetrate
the 40:1 departure OCS, as described in FAA Order 8260.3.
Only one ODP will be established for a particular runway.
This is considered the default IFR departure procedure for
a given runway and is intended for pilot awareness and
use in the absence of ATC radar vectors or SID assignment.
Text is not published to allow an option to use a SID or
alternate maneuver assigned by ATC (e.g., “Climb heading
330 to 1200 before turning or use Manchester Departure”
or “Turn right, climb direct ABC very high frequency (VHF)
omnidirectional range (VOR) or as assigned by ATC.”). ODPs
are textual in nature. However, due to the complex nature
of some procedures, a visual presentation may be necessary
for clarification and understanding. If the ODP is charted
graphically, the chart itself includes the word “Obstacle” in
parentheses in the title. Additionally, all newly-developed
RNAV ODPs are issued in graphical form.
All ODPs are listed in the front of the Aeronautical
Information Services approach chart booklets under
the heading Takeoff Minimums and Obstacle Departure
Procedures. Each procedure is listed in alphabetical order
by city and state. The ODP listing in the front of the booklet
includes a reference to the graphic chart located in the main
body of the booklet if one exists. [Figure 1-21]
ODP Flight Planning Considerations
ODPs are not assigned by ATC unless absolutely necessary
to achieve aircraft separation. It is the pilot’s responsibility
to determine if there is an ODP published for that airport. If a
Part 91 pilot is not given a clearance containing an ODP, SID,
or radar vectors and an ODP exists, compliance with such
a procedure is the pilot’s choice. A graphic ODP may also
be filed in an instrument flight plan by using the computer
code included in the procedure title. As a technique, the
pilot may enter “will depart (airport) (runway) via textual
ODP” in the remarks section of the flight plan. Providing
this information to the controller clarifies the intentions
of the pilot and helps prevent a potential pilot/controller
misunderstanding. If the ODP is not included in the pilot’s
clearance, the pilot should inform ATC when an ODP is
used for departure from a runway so that ATC can ensure
appropriate traffic separation.
During planning, pilots need to determine whether or
not the departure airport has an ODP. Remember, an ODP
can only be established at an airport that has instrument
approach procedures (IAPs). An ODP may drastically affect
the initial part of the flight plan. Pilots may have to depart
at a higher than normal climb rate, or depart in a direction
opposite the intended heading and maintain that for a
period of time, any of which would require an alteration in
the flight plan and initial headings. Considering the forecast
weather, departure runways, and existing ODP, plan the
flight route, climb performance, and fuel burn accordingly
to compensate for the departure procedure.
Additionally, when close-in obstacles are noted in the
Takeoff Minimums and (Obstacle) Departure Procedures
section, it may require the pilot to take action to avoid these
obstacles. Consideration must be given to decreased climb
performance from an inoperative engine or to the amount
of runway used for takeoff. Aircraft requiring a short takeoff
roll on a long runway may have little concern. On the other
hand, airplanes that use most of the available runway for
takeoff may not have the standard ROC when climbing at
the normal 200 ft/NM.
Another factor to consider is the possibility of an
1-23

NOT FOR NAVIGATION
SC-5, 23 SEP 2010 to 21 OCT 2010
Figure 1-22. SID chart.
1-24
SC-5, 23 SEP 2010 to 21 OCT 2010
SC-5, 23 SEP 2010 to 21 OCT 2010
SC-5, 23 SEP 2010 to 21 OCT 2010

Figure 1-23. Transition routes as depicted on SID.
1-25

engine failure during takeoff and departure. During the
preflight planning, use the aircraft performance charts
to determine if the aircraft can still maintain the required
climb performance. For high performance aircraft, an
engine failure may not impact the ability to maintain the
prescribed climb gradients. Aircraft that are performance
limited may have diminished capability and may be unable
to maintain altitude, let alone complete a climb to altitude.
Based on the performance expectations for the aircraft,
construct an emergency plan of action that includes
emergency checklists and the actions to take to ensure
safety in this situation.
Standard Instrument Departures (SIDs)
A SID is an ATC-requested and developed departure route,
typically used in busy terminal areas. It is designed at the
request of ATC in order to increase capacity of terminal
airspace, effectively control the flow of traffic with minimal
communication, and reduce environmental impact
through noise abatement procedures.
While obstacle protection is always considered in SID
routing, the primary goal is to reduce ATC/pilot workload
while providing seamless transitions to the en route
structure. ATC clearance must be received prior to flying
a SID. SIDs also provide additional benefits to both the
airspace capacity and the airspace users by reducing
radio congestion, allowing more efficient airspace use,
and simplifying departure clearances. All of the benefits
combine to provide effective, efficient terminal operations,
thereby increasing the overall capacity of the NAS.
If you cannot comply with a SID, if you do not possess the
charted SID procedure, or if you simply do not wish to
use SIDs, include the statement “NO SIDs” in the remarks
section of your flight plan. Doing so notifies ATC that they
cannot issue you a clearance containing a SID, but instead
will clear you via your filed route to the extent possible,
or via a Preferential Departure Route (PDR). It should be
noted that SID usage not only decreases clearance delivery
time, but also greatly simplifies your departure, easing you
into the IFR structure at a desirable location and decreases
your flight management load. While you are not required
to depart using a SID, it may be more difficult to receive
an “as filed” clearance when departing busy airports that
frequently use SID routing.
SIDs are always charted graphically and are located in the
TPP after the last approach chart for an airport. The SID
may be one or two pages in length, depending on the size
of the graphic and the amount of space required for the
departure description. Each chart depicts the departure
route, navigational fixes, transition routes, and required
1-26
altitudes. The departure description outlines the particular
procedure for each runway. [Figure 1-22]
Transition Routes
Charted transition routes allow pilots to transition from the
end of the basic SID to a location in the en route structure.
Typically, transition routes fan out in various directions
from the end of the basic SID to allow pilots to choose
the transition route that takes them in the direction of
intended departure. A transition route includes a course,
a minimum altitude, and distances between fixes on the
route. When filing a SID for a specific transition route,
include the transition in the flight plan, using the correct
departure and transition code. ATC also assigns transition
routes as a means of putting the flight on course to the
destination. In any case, the pilot must receive an ATC
clearance for the departure and the associated transition,
and the clearance from ATC will include both the departure
name and transition (e.g., Joe Pool Nine Departure, College
Station Transition). [Figure 1-23]
The SID is designed to allow the pilot to provide his or
her own navigation with minimal radio communication.
This type of procedure usually contains an initial set of
departure instructions followed by one or more transition
routes. A SID may include an initial segment requiring
radar vectors to help the flight join the procedure, but the
majority of the navigation remains the pilot’s responsibility.
[Figure 1-24]
A radar SID usually requires ATC to provide radar vectors
from just after takeoff (ROC is based on a climb to 400 feet
above the DER elevation before making the initial turn)
until reaching the assigned route or a fix depicted on the
SID chart. Radar SIDs do not include departure routes or
transition routes because independent pilot navigation
is not involved. The procedure sets forth an initial set of
departure instructions that typically include an initial
heading and altitude. ATC must have radar contact with
the aircraft to be able to provide vectors. ATC expects
you to immediately comply with radar vectors, and they
expect you to notify them if you are unable to fulfill their
request. ATC also expects you to make contact immediately
if an instruction causes you to compromise safety due to
obstructions or traffic.
It is prudent to review radar SID charts prior to use because
this type of procedure often includes nonstandard
lost communication procedures. If you were to lose
radio contact while being vectored by ATC, you would
be expected to comply with the lost communication
procedure as outlined on the chart, not necessarily those
procedures outlined in the AIM. [Figure 1-25]

Figure 1-24. Example of a common SID at Denver, Colorado.
1-27

Initial departure instructions
Lost communications procedure
specific to this departure
NOT FOR NAVIGATION
Figure 1-25. Example of a radar SID at Denver, Colorado.
SID Flight Planning Considerations
Take into consideration the departure paths included in
the SIDs, and determine if you can use a standardized
departure procedure. You have the opportunity to choose
the SID that best suits your flight plan. During the flight
planning phase, you can investigate each departure,
and determine which procedure allows you to depart
the airport in the direction of your intended flight. Also
consider how a climb gradient to a specific altitude affects
the climb time and fuel burn portions of the flight plan.
Notes giving procedural requirements are listed on the
graphic portion of a departure procedure, and they are
mandatory in nature. [Figure 1-26] Mandatory procedural
1-28
SW-1, 23 SEP 2010 to 21 OCT 2010
SW-1, 23 SEP 2010 to 21 OCT 2010
En route chart reference
Departure airport
SW-1, 23 SEP 2010 to 21 OCT 2010
notes may include:
•
Aircraft equipment requirements (DME, ADF, etc.)
•
ATC equipment in operation (radar)
•
Minimum climb requirements
•
Restrictions for specific types of aircraft (turbojet only)
•
Limited use to certain destinations
Cautionary statements may also be included on the
procedure to notify you of specific activity, but these are
strictly advisory. [Figure 1-26] If you are unable to comply
with a specific requirement, you must not file the procedure
as part of your flight plan. If ATC assigns you a SID, you may
SW-1, 23 SEP 2010 to 21 OCT 2010

Figure 1-26. Departure procedure notes and cautionary statements.
need to quickly recalculate your all-engines-operating
performance numbers. If you cannot comply with the
climb gradient in the SID, you should not accept a clearance
for that SID and furthermore, you must not accept the
procedure if ATC assigns it.
A clearance for a SID which contains published altitude
restrictions may be issued using the phraseology “climb
via.” Climb via is an abbreviated clearance that requires
compliance with the procedure lateral path, associated
speed and altitude restrictions along the cleared route or
procedure. Expanded procedures for "Climb via" can be
found in the AIM.
ATC can assign SIDs or radar vectors as necessary for traffic
management and convenience. To fly a SID, you must
receive approval to do so in a clearance. In order to accept
a clearance that includes a SID, you must have the charted
1-29

SID procedure in your possession at the time of departure.
It is your responsibility as pilot in command to accept or
reject the issuance of a SID by ATC. You must accept or
reject the clearance based on:
•
The ability to comply with the required performance.
•
The ability to navigate to the degree of accuracy
required for the procedure.
•
Possession of the charted SID procedure.
•
Personal understanding of the SID in its entirety.
When you accept a clearance to depart using a SID or radar
vectors, ATC is responsible for traffic separation. When
departing with a SID, ATC expects you to fly the procedure as
charted because the procedure design considers obstacle
clearance. It is also expected that you will remain vigilant
in scanning for traffic when departing in visual conditions.
Furthermore, it is your responsibility to notify ATC if your
clearance would endanger your safety or the safety of others.
DPs are also categorized by equipment requirements
as follows:
•
Non-RNAV DP—established for aircraft equipped
with conventional avionics using ground-based
NAVAIDs.These DPs may also be designed using dead
reckoning navigation. Some flight management
systems (FMS) are certified to fly a non-RNAV DP
if the FMS unit accepts inputs from conventional
avionics sources, such as DME, VOR, and localizer
(LOC). These inputs include radio tuning and may
Figure 1-27. RNP departure levels.
1-30
be applied to a navigation solution one at a time or
in combination. Some FMS provide for the detection
and isolation of faulty navigation information.
•
RNAV DP—established for aircraft equipped with
RNAV avionics (e.g., GPS, VOR/DME, DME/DME).
Automated vertical navigation is not required,
and all RNAV procedures not requiring GPS must
be annotated with the note: “RADAR REQUIRED.”
Prior to using TSO-C129 GPS equipment for RNAV
departures, approach receiver autonomous integrity
monitoring (RAIM) availability should be checked for
that location.
•
Radar DP—radar may be used for navigation
guidance for SID design. Radar SIDs are established
when ATC has a need to vector aircraft on departure
to a particular ATS Route, NAVAID, or fix. A fix may
be a ground-based NAVAID, a waypoint, or defined
by reference to one or more radio NAVAIDs. Not all
fixes are waypoints since a fix could be a VOR or VOR/
DME, but all waypoints are fixes. Radar vectors may
also be used to join conventional or RNAV navigation
SIDs. SIDs requiring radar vectors must be annotated
“RADAR REQUIRED.”
Area Navigation (RNAV) Departures
Historically, departure procedures were built around
existing ground-based technology and were typically
designed to accommodate lower traffic volumes. Often,
departure and arrival routes use the same NAVAIDs creating
1.0 NM
1.0 NM
Path centerline
2.0 NM
2.0 NM

FAA Flight Plan Aircraft Suffixes
Suffix
Equipment Capability
NO DME
/X
No transponder
/T
Transponder with no Mode C
/U
Transponder with Mode C
DME
/D
No transponder
/B
Transponder with no Mode C
/A
Transponder with Mode C
TACAN ONLY
/M
No transponder
/N
Transponder with no Mode C
/P
Transponder with Mode C
AREA NAVIGATION (RNAV)
/Y
LORAN, VOR/DME, or INS with no transponder
/C
LORAN, VOR/DME, or INS, transponder with no
Mode C
/I
LORAN, VOR/DME, or INS, transponder with
Mode C
ADVANCED RNAV WITH TRANSPONDER AND
MODE C (If an aircraft is unable to operate with a
transponder and/or Mode C, it will revert to the
appropriate code listed above under Area
Navigation.)
/E
Flight Management System (FMS) with DME/DME
and IRU position updating
/F
Flight Management System (FMS) with DME/DME
position updating
/G
Global Navigation Satellite System (GNSS),
including GPS or WAAS, with en route and
terminal capability.
/R
Required Navigational Performance (RNP). The
aircraft meets the RNP type prescribed for the
route segment(s), route(s), and/or area concerned.
Reduced Vertical Separation Minimum (RVSM).
Prior to conducting RVSM operations within the
U.S., the operator must obtain authorization from
the FAA or from the responsible authority, as
appropriate.
/J
/E with RVSM
/K
/F with RVSM
/L
/G with RVSM
/Q
/R with RVSM
/W
RVSM
Figure 1-28. Flight plan equipment codes (continued on next page).
ICAO Flight Plan Equipment Codes
Radio communication, navigation and approach
aid equipment and capabilities
“N” if no COM/NAV/approach aid equipment for the route to be
flown is carried, or the equipment is unserviceable, OR “S” if standard
COM/NAV/ approach aid equipment for the route to be flown is
carried and serviceable (see note 1), AND/OR INSERT one or more of
the following letters to indicate the serviceable COM/NAV/approach
aid equipment and capabilities available:
A
GBAS landing system
B
LPV (APV with SBAS)
C
LORAN C
D
DME
E1
FMC WPR ACARS
E2
D-FIS ACARS
E3
PDC ACARS
F
ADF
G
GNSS (See Note 2)
H
HF RTF
I
Intertial Navigation
J1
CPDLC ATN VDL Mode 2 (See Note 3)
J2
CPDLC FANS 1/A HFDL
J3
CPDLC FANS 1/A VDL Mode 4
J4
CPDLC FANS 1/A VDL Mode 2
J5
CPDLC FANS 1/A SATCOM (INMARSAT)
J6
CPDLC FANS 1/A SATCOM (MTSAT)
J7
CPDLC FANS 1/A SATCOM (Iridium)
K
MLS
L
ILS
M1
OmegaATC RTF SATCOM
M2
ATC RTF (MTSAT)
M3
ATC RTF (Iridium)
O
VOR
P1 - P9
Reserved for RCP
R
PBN approved (see Note 4)
T
TACAN
U
UHF RTF
V
VHF RTF
W
RVSM approved
X
MNPS approved
Y
VHF with 8.33 kHz channel spacing capability
Z
Other equipment carried or other capabilities
(see Note 5)
Any alphanumeric characters not indicated above are reserved.
Effective September 1, 2005.
1-31

ICAO Flight Plan Equipment Codes
Surveillance equipment and capabilities
INSERT N if no surveillance equipment for the route to be flown
is carried, or the equipment is unserviceable, OR INSERT one or
more of the following descriptors, to a maximum of 20 characters,
to describe the serviceable surveillance equipment carried and/or
capabilities on board:
SSR Modes A and C
Transponder - Mode A (4 digits - 4,096 codes)
A
Transponder - Mode A (4 digits - 4,096 codes) and
C
Mode C
SSR Modes S
Transponder—Mode S, including aircraft identification,
E
pressure-altitude and extended squitter (ADS-B)
capability
Transponder—Mode S, including aircraft identification,
H
pressure-altitude and enhanced surveillance capability
Transponder—Mode S, including aircraft identification,
I
but no pressure-altitude capability
Transponder—Mode S, including aircraft identification,
L
pressure-altitude, extended squitter (ADS-B) and
enhanced surveillance capability
Transponder—Mode S, including pressure-altitude, but
P
no aircraft identification capability
Transponder—Mode S, including both pressure altitude
S
and aircraft identification capability
Transponder — Mode S with neither aircraft
X
identification nor pressure-altitude capability
Note: Enhanced surveillance capability is the ability of the aircraft
to down-link aircraft derived data via a Mode S transponder.
ADS-B
ADS-B with dedicated 1090 MHz ADS-B “out” capability
B1
ADS-B with dedicated 1090 MHz ADS-B “out” and “in”
B2
capability
ADS-B “out” capability using UAT
U1
ADS-B “out” and “in” capability using UAT
U2
ADS-B “out” capability using VDL Mode 4
V1
ADS-B “out” and “in” capability using VDL Mode 4
V2
D1
D1 ADS-C with FANS 1/A capabilities
G1
G1 ADS-C with ATN capabilities
Alphanumeric characters not indicated above are reserved.
Example: ADE3RV/HB2U2V2G1
Note: Additional surveillance application should be listed in
Item 18 following the indicator SUR/ .
Figure 1-28. Flight plan equipment codes (continued).
1-32
NOTE
Note 1
If the letter S is used, standard equipment is considered
to be VHF RTF, VOR and ILS, unless another combina­
tion is prescribed by the appropriate ATS authority.
Note 2
If the letter G is used, the types of external GNSS
augmentation, if any, are specified in Item 18 following
the indicator NAV/ and separated by a space.
Note 3
See RTCA/EUROCAE Interoperability Requirements
Standard For ATN Baseline 1 (ATN B1 INTEROP Standard
DO-280B/ED-110B) for data link services air traffic
control clearance and information/air traffic control
communications management/air traffic control
microphone check.
Note 4
Information on navigation capability is provided to
ATC for clearance and routing purposes.
Note 5
If the letter Z is used, specify in Item 18 the other
equipment carried or other capabilities, preceded
by COM/, NAV/ and/or DAT, as appropriate.
Note 6
If the letter R is used, the performance based naviga­
tion levels that can be met are specified in Item 18
following the indicator PBN/. Guidance material on the
application of performance based navigation to a
specific route segment, route or area is contained in
the Performance-Based Navigation Manual (Doc 9613).
Note 7
RNAV- equipped aircraft capable of flying RNAV SIDs,
putting “NO SID” in the remarks section will not always
result in a clearance via a Preferential Departure Route
(PDR). The Pilot/Dispatcher must amend Field 18 NAV
from D1 to D0 and remove PBRN RNAV1 Code (D1-D4).
Note 8
If a RNAV DP is filed, an ICAO flight plan must be used.
In Field 18, Pilots/Dispatchers must file a D1 or D2
depending on the RNAV DP. Additionally, Field 18
should include PBN/D1-D4 depending on the naviga­
tion update source. See AIM/PANS ATM 4444 for ICAO
filing procedures.
Note 9
RNAV Q-routes require en route RNAV 2, corresponding
NAV/E2 code and PBN/C1-C4 based on navigation
system update source.
Note 10
If an aircraft does not meet the requirements for RVSM,
then the W filed in ICAO flight plan Field 10A must be
removed and STS/NONRVSM must be annotated in
Field 18.
Note 11
Filing requirements for RNAV STARS. Field 18 of the
ICAO flight plan must have a NAV/A1 or A2 assigned to
the RNAV STAR. Additionally, PBN/D1-D4 for RNAV1 or
C1-C4 for RNAV2 should be filed. If unable to accept the
RNAV STAR, the flight plan must be amended to change
the NAV/A1 or A2 to A0.

interdependent, capacity diminishing routes. RNAV is a
method of navigation that permits aircraft operation on
any desired flight path within the coverage of ground- or
spaced- based NAVAIDs or within the limits of the capability
of self-contained aids or a combination of these. In the
future, there will be an increased dependence on the
use of RNAV in lieu of routes defined by ground-based
NAVAIDs. As a part of the evolving RNAV structure, the
FAA has developed departure procedures for pilots flying
aircraft equipped with some type of RNAV technology.
RNAV allows for the creation of new departure routes
that are independent of present fixes and NAVAIDs. RNAV
routing is part of the National Airspace Redesign (NAR) and
is expected to reduce complexity and increase efficiency
of terminal airspace.
When new RNAV departure procedures are designed,
they will require minimal vectoring and communications
between pilots and ATC. Usually, each departure procedure
includes position, time, and altitude, which increase
the ability to predict what the pilot will actually do.
RNAV departure procedures have the ability to increase
the capacity of terminal airspace by increasing on-
time departures, airspace utilization, and improved
predictability.
All public RNAV SIDs and graphic ODPs are RNAV 1. These
procedures generally start with an initial RNAV or heading
leg near the departure end runway. In addition, these
procedures require system performance currently met
by GPS, DME/DME/Inertial Reference Unit (IRU) RNAV
systems that satisfy the criteria discussed in AC 90-100, U.S.
Terminal and En Route Area Navigation (RNAV) Operations.
RNAV departures are identifiable by the inclusion of the
term RNAV in the title of the departure. From a required
navigation performance (RNP) standpoint, RNAV departure
routes are designed with 1 or 2 NM performance standards
as listed below. This means you as the pilot and your aircraft
equipment must be able to maintain the aircraft within 1
or 2 NM either side of route centerline. [Figure 1-27]
•
RNAV 1 procedures require that the aircraft’s total
system error remain bounded by ±1 NM for 95
percent of the total flight time.
•
RNAV 2 requires a total system error of not more
than 2 NM for 95 percent of the total flight time.
RNP is RNAV with on-board monitoring and alerting; RNP is
also a statement of navigation performance necessary for
operation within defined airspace. RNP 1 (in-lieu-of RNAV
1) is used when a DP that contains a constant radius to a
fix (RF) leg or when surveillance (radar) monitoring is not
desired for when DME/DME/IRU is used. These procedures
are annotated with a standard note: “RNP 1.”
If unable to comply with the requirements of an RNAV
or RNP procedure, pilots need to advise ATC as soon as
possible. For example, “N1234, failure of GPS system,
unable RNAV, request amended clearance.” Pilots are not
authorized to fly a published RNAV or RNP procedure unless
it is retrievable by the procedure name from the navigation
database and conforms to the charted procedure. No other
modification of database waypoints or creation of user-
defined waypoints on published RNAV or RNP procedures
is permitted, except to change altitude and/or airspeed
waypoint constraints to comply with an ATC clearance/
instruction, or to insert a waypoint along the published
route to assist in complying with an ATC instruction. For
example, “Climb via the WILIT departure except cross 30
north of CHUCK at/ or above FL 210.” This is limited only
to systems that allow along track waypoint construction.
Pilots of aircraft utilizing DME/DME for primary navigation
updating should ensure any required DME stations are in
service as determined by NOTAM, ATIS, or ATC advisory.
DME/DME navigation system updating may require specific
DME facilities to meet performance standards. Based on
DME availability evaluations at the time of publication,
current DME coverage is not sufficient to support DME/DME
RNAV operations everywhere without IRU augmentation or
use of GPS. [Figure 1-28] DP chart notes may also include
operational information for certain types of equipment,
systems, and performance requirements, in addition to
the type of RNAV departure procedure.
While operating on RNAV segments, pilots are encouraged
to use the flight director in lateral navigation mode. RNAV
terminal procedures may be amended by ATC issuing radar
vectors and/or clearances direct to a waypoint. Pilots should
avoid premature manual deletion of waypoints from their
active “legs” page to allow for rejoining procedures. While
operating on RNAV segments, pilots operating /R aircraft
should adhere to any flight manual limitation or operating
procedure required to maintain the RNP value specified for
the procedure. In 2008, the FAA implemented the use of
en route host automation ICAO flight plan (FP) processing
for requesting assignment of RNAV SID, Standard Terminal
Arrivals (STARs), or RNAV routes U.S. domestic airspace.
This is part of a risk reduction strategy for introduction of
the En Route Automation Modernization (ERAM) system in
October 2008. ERAM also will use ICAO FP processing and as
a result aircrews should be aware that as the FAA updates to
ERAM the standard FAA flight plan equipment suffix codes
will change to the ICAO flight plan equipment suffix codes.
For procedures requiring GPS and/or aircraft approvals
requiring GPS, if the navigation system does not
automatically alert the flight crew of a loss of GPS, aircraft
operators must develop procedures to verify correct GPS
1-33

Figure 1-29. Examples of RNAV SID.
1-34

Figure 1-30. Examples of RNAV ODP.
1-35

NOT FOR NAVIGATION
Figure 1-31. Fly-over and fly-by waypoints.
operation. If not equipped with GPS, or for multi-sensor
systems with GPS that do not alert upon loss of GPS, aircraft
must be capable of navigation system updating using DME/
DME or DME/DME/ IRU for type 1 and 2 procedures. AC 90­
100 may be used as operational guidance for RNAV ODPs.
Pilots of FMS-equipped aircraft who are assigned an RNAV
DP procedure and subsequently receive a change of runway,
transition, or procedure, must verify that the appropriate
changes are loaded and available for navigation. [Figures
1-29 and 1-30]
Additionally, new waypoint symbols are used in conjunction
with RNAV charts. There are two types of waypoints
currently in use: fly-by (FB) and fly-over (FO). A FB waypoint
typically is used in a position at which a change in the course
of procedure occurs. Charts represent them with four-
pointed stars. This type of waypoint is designed to allow
you to anticipate and begin your turn prior to reaching the
waypoint, thus providing smoother transitions. Conversely,
RNAV charts show a FO waypoint as a four-pointed star
enclosed in a circle. This type of waypoint is used to denote
a missed approach point, a missed approach holding
point, or other specific points in space that must be flown
1-36
A fly-over (FO) waypoint precludes any turn until the waypoint is overflown.
A fly-by (FB) waypoint requires the use of turn
anticipation to avoid overshooting the next segment.
over. [Figure 1-31] Pilots should not change any database
waypoint type from a FB to FO, or vice versa.
There are specific requirements; however, that must be met
before using RNAV procedures. Every RNAV departure chart
lists general notes and may include specific equipment and
performance requirements, as well as the type of RNAV
departure procedure in the chart plan view. New aircraft
equipment suffix codes are used to denote capabilities for
advanced RNAV navigation for flight plan filing purposes.
[Figure 1-32]
SID Altitudes
SID altitudes can be charted in four different ways. The
first are mandatory altitudes, the second, minimum
altitudes, the third, maximum altitudes and the fourth is a
combination of minimum and maximum altitudes or also
referred to as block altitudes. Below are examples of how
each will be shown on a SID chart.
•
Mandatory altitudes – 5500
•
Minimum altitudes – 2300
•
Maximum altitudes – 3300

NOT FOR NAVIGATION
Figure 1-32. Operation requirements for RNAV.
•
Combination of minimum and maximum – 7000
Some SIDs may still have “(ATC)” adjacent to a crossing
altitude as shown in Figure 1-33 which implies that the
crossing altitude is there to support an ATC requirement.
A new charting standard has begun a process to remove,
over a period of time, the ATC annotation. The Cowboy
Four Departure (RNAV) shown in Figure 1-34 depicts the
new charting standard without ATC annotations. When
necessary, ATC may amend or delete SID crossing altitude
restrictions; when doing so, ATC assumes responsibility
for obstacle clearance until the aircraft is re-established
laterally and vertically on the published SID route.
Pilot Responsibility for Use of RNAV Departures
RNAV usage brings with it multitudes of complications
as it is being implemented. It takes time to transition,
to disseminate information, and to educate current
and potential users. As a current pilot using the NAS,
you need to have a clear understanding of the aircraft
equipment requirements for operating in a given RNP
Aircraft system operation requirements
environment. You must understand the type of navigation
system installed in your aircraft, and furthermore, you
must know how your system operates to ensure that
you can comply with all RNAV requirements. Operational
information should be included in your AFM or its
supplements. Additional information concerning how
to use your equipment to its fullest capacity, including
“how to” training, may be gathered from your avionics
manufacturer. If you are in doubt about the operation of
your avionics system and its ability to comply with RNAV
requirements, contact the FAA directly through your local
Flight Standards District Office (FSDO). RNAV departure
procedures are being developed at a rapid pace to provide
RNAV capabilities at all airports. With every chart revision
cycle, new RNAV departures are being added for small
and large airports. These departures are flown in the same
manner as traditional navigation-based departures; pilots
are provided headings, altitudes, navigation waypoint,
and departure descriptions. RNAV SIDs are found in the
TPP with traditional departure procedures.
1-37

NOT FOR NAVIGATION
Figure 1-33. Crossing altitude is there to support an ATC requirement.
Radar Departures
A radar departure is another option for departing an airport
on an IFR flight. You might receive a radar departure if the
airport does not have an established departure procedure,
if you are unable to comply with a departure procedure, or
if you request “No SIDs” as a part of your flight plan. Expect
ATC to issue an initial departure heading if you are being
radar vectored after takeoff; however, do not expect to
be given a purpose for the specific vector heading. Rest
assured that the controller knows your flight route and will
vector you into position. By nature of the departure type,
once you are issued your clearance, the responsibility for
coordination of your flight rests with ATC, including the
tower controller and, after handoff, the departure controller
who will remain with you until you are released on course
and allowed to “resume own navigation.”
For all practical purposes, a radar departure is the easiest
type of departure to use. It is also a good alternative to a
published departure procedure, particularly when none of
the available departure procedures are conducive to your
flight route. However, it is advisable to always maintain a
detailed awareness of your location while you are being
radar vectored by ATC. If for some reason radar contact is
1-38
SW-4, 23 SEP 2010 to 21 OCT 2010
SW-4, 23 SEP 2010 to 21 OCT 2010
lost, you will be asked to provide position reports in order
for ATC to monitor your flight progress. Also, ATC may
release you to “resume own navigation” after vectoring you
off course momentarily for a variety of reasons, including
weather or traffic.
Upon initial contact, state your aircraft or flight number,
the altitude you are climbing through, and the altitude
to which you are climbing. The controller will verify that
your reported altitude matches that emitted by your
transponder. If your altitude does not match, or if you
do not have Mode C capabilities, you will be continually
required to report your position and altitude for ATC.
The controller is not required to provide terrain and
obstacle clearance just because ATC has radar contact
with your aircraft. It remains your responsibility until the
controller begins to provide navigational guidance in
the form of radar vectors. Once radar vectors are given,
you are expected to promptly comply with headings and
altitudes as assigned. Question any assigned heading if you
believe it to be incorrect or if it would cause a violation of
a regulation, then advise ATC immediately and obtain a
revised clearance.

NOT FOR NAVIGATION
NOT FOR NAVIGATION
Figure 1-34. New charting standard without ATC annotations.
SW-4, XX XXX 2011 to XX XXX 2011
SW-4, XX XXX 2011 to XX XXX 2011
SW-4, XX XXX 2011 to XX XXX 2011
SW-4, XX XXX 2011 to XX XXX 2011
1-39

MVA
Figure 1-35. Diverse vector area establishment criteria.
TAKE-OFF MINIMUMS AND (OBSTACLE) DEPARTURE PROCEDURES
SAMPLE NOT FOR ACTUAL
AUBURN,CA
40 AGL/1559 MSL.
AUBURN MUNI (AUN)
BEALE AFB (KBAB)
23 SEP 2010 to 21 OCT 2010
MARYSVILLE, CA. . . . . . . . . .ORIG, 09155
DEPARTURE PROCEDURE: Rwy 15, Climb on a
DER.
TAKE-OFF OBSTACLES: Rwy 33,
BECKWOURTH, CA
NERVINO
TAKE-OFF MINIMUMS: Rwys 7, 25, 3500-3 for climb in
visual conditions.
DEPARTURE PROCEDURE: Rwys 7, 25, for climb in
visual conditions: cross Nervino Airport at or above
8300 before proceeding on course.
NOTE: Rwy 7, road 58' from departure end of runway,
469' right of centerline, 15' AGL/4920' MSL. Pole 310'
from departure end of runway, 522' right of centerline,
49'AGL/4925'MSL P l 528'f
Figure 1-36. Examples of takeoff minimums obstacle clearance.
1-40
Diverse vector areas allow for the maneuvering
of aircraft below the established minimum
vectoring altitude for a particular airport.
Diverse Departure Criteria is used to
identify obstacles in the departure path.
3 NM
TUAL USE
L2
BISHOP, CA
Rwy 30, multiple poles, building, and terrain beginning
EASTERN
SIERRA
RGN
L
centerline,
66' from departure end of runway, 228' left of
AGL/225'
Multiple poles beginning 949'
up to 65'
MSL.
23 SEP 2010 to 21 OCT 2010
from departure end of runway, 28' right of centerline, up
to 42' AGL/103' MSL.
Rwy 33,
CHICO, CA
CHICO MUNI
DEPARTURE PROCEDURE: Rwys 13L/R, climbing
right turn. Rwys 31L/R, climbing left turn. All aircraft,
climb via CIC R-205 to JINGO Int. Aircraft departing
inbound) to depart JINGO Int at or above 2800.
CLOVERDALE, CA
CLOVERDALE MUNI
TAKE-OFF MINIMUMS: Rwy 14, 400-2 or std. with a
min. climb of 280' per NM to 1500, then a min. climb of
260' per NM to 3900. Rwy 32, NA.
DEPARTURE PROCEDURE: Rwy 14, climb direct STS
VOR/DME. Continue climb in holding pattern (NW
d
t
d f

NOT FOR NAVIGATION
NE-1, 23 SEP 2010 to 21 OCT 2010
Figure 1-37. Noise abatement SID.
Procedure designed for noise abatement purposes
NE-1, 23 SEP 2010 to 21 OCT 2010
1-41

Diverse Vector Area
ATC may establish a minimum vectoring altitude (MVA)
around certain airports. This altitude, based on terrain and
obstruction clearance, provides controllers with minimum
altitudes to vector aircraft in and around a particular
location. However, at times, it may be necessary to vector
aircraft below this altitude to assist in the efficient flow of
departing traffic. For this reason, an airport may have an
established Diverse Vector Area (DVA). This DVA may be
established below the MVA or Minimum IFR Altitude (MIA)
in a radar environment at the request of Air Traffic. This
type of DP meets the TERPs criteria for diverse departures,
obstacles and terrain avoidance in which random radar
vectors below the MVA/MIA may be issued to departing
traffic.
The existence of a DVA will be noted in the Takeoff
Minimums and Obstacle Departure Procedures section of
the U.S. Terminal Procedure Publication (TPP). The Takeoff
Departure procedure will be listed first, followed by any
applicable DVA. Pilots should be aware that Air Traffic
facilities may utilize a climb gradient greater than the
standard 200 ft/NM within a DVA. This information will be
identified in the DVA text for pilot evaluation against the
aircraft's performance. Pilots should note that the DVA
has been assessed for departures which do not follow a
specified ground track, but will remain within the specified
area. ATC may also vector an aircraft off a previously
assigned DP. In all cases, the minimum 200 ft/NM climb
gradient is assumed unless a higher is specified on the
departure, and obstacle clearance is not provided by ATC
until the controller begins to provide navigational guidance
(vectors). Lastly, pilots should understand ATC instructions
take precedence over an ODP [Figure 1-35].
Visual Climb Over Airport (VCOA)
A visual climb over airport (VCOA) is a departure option for
an IFR aircraft, operating in VMC equal to or greater than the
specified visibility and ceiling, to visually conduct climbing
turns over the airport to the published "climb-to" altitude
from which to proceed with the instrument portion of the
departure. A VCOA is a departure option developed when
obstacles farther than 3 SM from the airport require a CG
of more than 200 ft/NM.
These procedures are published in the Take-Off
Minimums and (Obstacle) Departure Procedures section
of the TPP. [Figure 1-36] Prior to departure, pilots are
required to notify ATC when executing the VCOA.
1-42
Noise Abatement Procedures
As the aviation industry continues to grow and air traffic
increases, so does the population of people and businesses
around airports. As a result, noise abatement procedures
have become commonplace at most of the nation’s airports.
14 CFR Part 150 specifies the responsibilities of the FAA to
investigate the recommendations of the airport operator in
a noise compatibility program and approve or disapprove
the noise abatement suggestions. This is a crucial step in
ensuring that the airport is not unduly inhibited by noise
requirements and that air traffic workload and efficiency
are not significantly impacted, all while considering the
noise problems addressed by the surrounding community.
While most DPs are designed for obstacle clearance and
workload reduction, there are some SIDs that are developed
solely to comply with noise abatement requirements.
Portland International Jetport is an example of an airport
where a SID was created strictly for noise abatement
purposes as noted in the DP. [Figure 1-36] Typically, noise
restrictions are incorporated into the main body of the
SID. These types of restrictions require higher departure
altitudes, larger climb gradients, reduced airspeeds, and
turns to avoid specific areas. Noise restrictions may also
be evident during a radar departure. ATC may require you
to turn away from your intended course or vector you
around a particular area. While these restrictions may seem
burdensome, it is important to remember that it is your
duty to comply with written and spoken requests from ATC.
Additionally, when required, departure instructions specify
the actual heading to be flown after takeoff, as is the case in
Figure 1-37 under the departure route description, “Climb
via heading 112 degrees...” Some existing procedures specify,
“Climb runway heading.”Over time, both of these departure
instructions will be updated to read, “Climb heading 112
degrees....” Runway heading is the magnetic direction that
corresponds with the runway centerline extended (charted
on the airport diagram), not the numbers painted on the
runway. Pilots cleared to “fly or maintain runway heading”
are expected to fly or maintain the published heading that
corresponds with the extended centerline of the departure
runway (until otherwise instructed by ATC), and are not to
apply drift correction (e.g., RWY 11, actual magnetic heading
of the runway centerline 112.2 degrees, “fly heading 112
degrees”). In the event of parallel departures, this prevents
a loss of separation caused by only one aircraft applying a
wind drift.

Procedural Notes
An important consideration to make during your flight
planning is whether or not you are able to fly your chosen
departure procedure as charted.
DP Responsibilities
Responsibility for the safe execution of DPs rests on the
shoulders of both ATC and the pilot. Without the interest
and attention of both parties, the IFR system cannot work
in harmony, and achievement of safety is impossible.
ATC, in all forms, is responsible for issuing clearances
appropriate to the operations being conducted, assigning
altitudes for IFR flight above the minimum IFR altitudes for
a specific area of controlled airspace, ensuring the pilot has
acknowledged the clearance or instructions, and ensuring
the correct read back of instructions. Specifically related to
departures, ATC is responsible for specifying the direction
of takeoff or initial heading when necessary, obtaining pilot
concurrence that the procedure complies with local traffic
patterns, terrain, and obstruction clearance, and including
DP as part of the ATC clearance when pilot compliance for
separation is necessary.
The pilot has a number of responsibilities when simply
operating in conjunction with ATC or when using DPs under
an IFR clearance:
•
Acknowledge receipt and understanding of an ATC
clearance.
•
Read back any part of a clearance that contains “hold
short” instructions.
•
Request clarification of clearances.
•
Request an amendment to a clearance if it is
unacceptable from a safety perspective.
•
Promptly comply with ATC requests. Advise ATC
immediately if unable to comply with a clearance.
•
You are required to contact ATC if you are unable to
comply with all-engines-operating climb gradients
and climb rates. It is also expected that you are
capable of maintaining the climb gradient outlined
in either a standard or non-standard DP. If you
cannot maintain a standard climb gradient or the
climb gradient specified in an ODP, you must wait
until you can depart under VMC.
When planning for a departure, pilots should:
•
Consider the type of terrain and other obstructions in
the vicinity of the airport.
•
Determine if obstacle clearance can be maintained
visually, or if they need to make use of a DP.
•
Determine if an ODP or SID is available for the
departure airport.
•
Determine what actions allow for a safe departure
out of an airport that does not have any type of
affiliated DPs.
By simply complying with DPs in their entirety as published,
obstacle clearance is guaranteed. Depending on the type
of departure used, responsibility for terrain clearance
and traffic separation may be shared between pilots and
controllers.
Departures From Tower-Controlled Airports
Departing from a tower-controlled airport is relatively
simple in comparison to departing from non-towered
airport. Normally you request your IFR clearance through
ground control or clearance delivery. Communication
frequencies for the various controllers are listed on
departure, approach, and airport charts, as well as the
Chart Supplement (CS). At some airports, you may have
the option of receiving a pre-taxi clearance. This program
allows you to call ground control or clearance delivery no
more than 10 minutes prior to beginning taxi operations
and receive your IFR clearance. A pre-departure clearance
(PDC) program that allows pilots to receive a clearance via
data link from a dispatcher or a data link communications
service provider, e.g. ARINC, is available for Part 121 and
135 operators. A clearance is given to the dispatcher, who
i
n turn, relays it to the crew, enabling the crew to bypass
communication with clearance delivery, thus reducing
f
requency congestion. Once you have received your
clearance, it is your responsibility to comply with the
i
nstructions as given, and notify ATC if you are unable to
c
omply with the clearance. If you do not understand the
c
learance, or if you think that you have missed a portion
of the clearance, contact ATC immediately for clarification.
Departures From Airports Without an
Operating Control Tower
There are hundreds of airports across the United States
t
hat operate successfully every day without the benefit of
a control tower. While a tower is certainly beneficial when
departing IFR, most other departures can be made with
f
ew challenges. As usual, you must file your flight plan at
l
east 30 minutes in advance. During your planning phase,
i
nvestigate the departure airport’s method for receiving an
instrument clearance. You can contact the Flight Service
Station (FSS) on the ground by telephone, and they will
request your clearance from ATC. Typically, when a clearance
is given in this manner, the clearance includes a void time.
You must depart the airport before the clearance void time;
if you fail to depart, you must contact ATC by a specified
1-43

notification time, which is within 30 minutes of the original
void time. After the clearance void time, your reserved space
within the IFR system is released for other traffic.
There are several other ways to receive a clearance at a non-
towered airport. If you can contact the FSS or ATC on the
radio, you can request your departure clearance. However,
these frequencies are typically congested, and they may
not be able to provide you with a clearance via the radio.
You also can use a Remote Communications Outlet (RCO)
to contact a FSS if one is located nearby. Some airports
have licensed UNICOM operators that can also contact ATC
on your behalf and, in turn, relay your clearance from ATC.
You are also allowed to depart the airport VFR, if conditions
permit, and contact the controlling authority to request
your clearance in the air. If there is a direct line to the
controlling ATC Facility, the phone number is published
in the Chart Supplement U.S. (formerly Airport/Facility
Directory (A/FD). As technology improves, new methods
for delivery of clearances at non-towered airports are being
created.
Ground Communication Outlet
Ground Communication Outlets (GCO), have been
developed in conjunction with the FAA to provide pilots
flying in and out of non-towered airports with the capability
to contact ATC and AFSS via very high frequency (VHF)
radio to a telephone connection. This lets pilots obtain an
instrument clearance or close a VFR/IFR flight plan. You can
use four key clicks on your VHF radio to contact the nearest
ATC facility and six key clicks to contact the local AFSS, but it
is intended to be used only as a ground operational tool. A
GCO is an unstaffed, remote controlled ground-to-ground
communication facility that is relatively inexpensive to
install and operate. Installations of these types of outlets
are scheduled at instrument airports around the country.
GCOs are manufactured by different companies including
ARINC and AVTECH, each with different operating
characteristics but with the ability to accomplish the same
goal. This latest technology has proven to be an incredibly
useful tool for communicating with the appropriate
authorities when departing IFR from a non-towered airport.
The GCO should help relieve the need to use the telephone
to call ATC and the need to depart into marginal conditions
just to achieve radio contact. GCO information is listed on
airport charts and instrument approach charts with other
communications frequencies. Signs may also be located on
an airport to notify you of the frequency and proper usage.
1-44
See and Avoid Techniques
Meteorological conditions permitting, you are required
to use “see and avoid” techniques to avoid traffic, terrain,
and other obstacles. To avoid obstacles during a departure,
the takeoff minimums may include a non-standard ceiling
and visibility minimum. These are given to pilots so they
can depart an airport without being able to meet the
established climb gradient. Instead, they must see and
avoid obstacles in the departure path. In these situations,
ATC provides radar traffic information for radar-identified
aircraft outside controlled airspace, workload permitting,
and safety alerts to pilots believed to be within an unsafe
proximity to obstacles or aircraft.
VFR Departures
There may be times when you need to fly an IFR flight
plan due to the weather you will encounter at a later time
(or if you simply wish to fly IFR to remain proficient), but
the weather outside is clearly VFR. It may be that you can
depart VFR, but you need to get an IFR clearance shortly
after departing the airport. A VFR departure can be used as
a tool that allows you to get off the ground without having
to wait for a time slot in the IFR system, however, departing
VFR with the intent of receiving an IFR clearance in the air
can also present serious hazards worth considering.
A VFR departure dramatically changes the takeoff
responsibilities for you and for ATC. Upon receiving
clearance for a VFR departure, you are cleared to depart;
however, you must maintain separation between yourself
and other traffic. You are also responsible for maintaining
terrain and obstruction clearance, as well as remaining in
VFR weather conditions. You cannot fly in IMC without first
receiving your IFR clearance. Likewise, a VFR departure
relieves ATC of these duties and basically requires them
only to provide you with safety alerts as workload permits.
Maintain VFR until you have obtained your IFR clearance
and have ATC approval to proceed on course in accordance
with your clearance. If you accept this clearance and are
below the minimum IFR altitude for operations in the area,
you accept responsibility for terrain/obstruction clearance
until you reach that altitude.