Chapter 4
Aerodynamic
Factors
Factors
=
Introduction
Several factors affect aircraft performance including the
atmosphere, aerodynamics, and aircraft icing. Pilots need an
understanding of these factors for a sound basis for prediction
of aircraft response to control inputs, especially with regard
to instrument approaches, while holding, and when operating
at reduced airspeed in instrument meteorological conditions
(IMC). Although these factors are important to the pilot flying
visual flight rules (VFR), they must be even more thoroughly
understood by the pilot operating under instrument flight
rules (IFR). Instrument pilots rely strictly on instrument
indications to precisely control the aircraft; therefore, they
must have a solid understanding of basic aerodynamic
principles in order to make accurate judgments regarding
aircraft control inputs.
|
4-1

The Wing
To understand aerodynamic forces, a pilot needs to
understand basic terminology associated with airfoils.
Figure 4-1 illustrates a typical airfoil.
The chord line is the straight line intersecting the leading
and trailing edges of the airfoil, and the term chord refers
to the chord line longitudinal length (length as viewed from
the side).
The mean camber is a line located halfway between the
upper and lower surfaces. Viewing the wing edgewise, the
mean camber connects with the chord line at each end. The
mean camber is important because it assists in determining
aerodynamic qualities of an airfoil. The measurement of
the maximum camber; inclusive of both the displacement
of the mean camber line and its linear measurement from
the end of the chord line, provide properties useful in
evaluating airfoils.
Review of Basic Aerodynamics
The instrument pilot must understand the relationship
and differences between several factors that affect the
performance of an aircraft in flight. Also, it is crucial to
understand how the aircraft reacts to various control and
power changes, because the environment in which instrument
pilots fly has inherent hazards not found in visual flying. The
basis for this understanding is found in the four forces acting
on an aircraft and Newton’s Three Laws of Motion.
Relative Wind is the direction of the airflow with respect to
an airfoil.
Angle of Attack (AOA) is the acute angle measured between
the relative wind, or flightpath and the chord of the airfoil.
[Figure 4-2]
Leading edge
Mean chord line
Figure 4-1. The airfoil.
4-2
L
R
Chord line
MC/4
D
C/4
C
Relative wind
V
Figure 4-2. Angle of attack and relative wind.
Flightpath is the course or track along which the aircraft is
flying or is intended to be flown.
The Four Forces
The four basic forces [Figure 4-3] acting upon an aircraft in
flight are lift, weight, thrust, and drag.
Lift
Lift is a component of the total aerodynamic force on an
airfoil and acts perpendicular to the relative wind. Relative
wind is the direction of the airflow with respect to an airfoil.
This force acts straight up from the average (called mean)
center of pressure (CP), which is called the center of lift. It
should be noted that it is a point along the chord line of an
airfoil through which all aerodynamic forces are considered
to act. The magnitude of lift varies proportionately with
speed, air density, shape and size of the airfoil, and AOA.
During straight-and-level flight, lift and weight are equal.
Mean camber line
Upper camber
Lower camber
Trailing edge

Right aileron
Lift
N
™
Horizontal
Vertical
Pitch
stabilizer
stabilizer
a
r
Rudder
—
—
Drag
x
~~
—
——o-”~=~SsSsSshsseh
-
a
—
a
Roll
Thrust
,
Elevator
Left
aileron
Wing
Yaw
z
y
Weight
Figure 4-3. The four forces and three axes of rotation.
Weight
• Skin Friction Drag
Covering the entire “wetted” surface of the aircraft is a thin
Weight is the force exerted by an aircraft from the pull of
layer of air called a boundary layer. The air molecules on the
gravity. It acts on an aircraft through its center of gravity (CG)
surface have zero velocity in relation to the surface; however,
and is straight down. This should not be confused with the
the layer just above moves over the stagnant molecules
center of lift, which can be significantly different from the
below because it is pulled along by a third layer close to
CG. As an aircraft is descending, weight is greater than lift.
the free stream of air. The velocities of the layers increase
Thrust
as the distance from the surface increases until free stream
velocity is reached, but all are affected by the free stream.
Thrust is the forward force produced by the powerplant/
The distance (total) between the skin surface and where free
propeller or rotor. It opposes or overcomes the force of drag.
stream velocity is reached is called the boundary layer. At
As a general rule, it acts parallel to the longitudinal axis.
subsonic levels the cumulative layers are about the thickness
of a playing card, yet their motion sliding over one another
Drag
creates a drag force. This force retards motion due to the
Drag is the net aerodynamic force parallel to the relative
viscosity of the air and is called skin friction drag. Because
wind and is generally a sum of two components: induced
skin friction drag is related to a large surface area its affect
drag and parasite drag.
on smaller aircraft is small versus large transport aircraft
where skin friction drag may be considerable.
Induced Drag
Induced drag is caused from the creation of lift and increases
• Interference Drag
with AOA. Therefore, if the wing is not producing lift, induced
Interference drag is generated by the collision of airstreams
drag is zero. Conversely, induced drag decreases with airspeed.
creating eddy currents, turbulence, or restrictions to smooth
flow. For instance, the airflow around a fuselage and around
Parasite Drag
the wing meet at some point, usually near the wing’s root.
Parasite drag is all drag not caused from the production of
These airflows interfere with each other causing a greater drag
lift. Parasite drag is created by displacement of air by the
than the individual values. This is often the case when external
aircraft, turbulence generated by the airfoil, and the hindrance
items are placed on an aircraft. That is, the drag of each item
of airflow as it passes over the surface of the aircraft or
individually, added to that of the aircraft, are less than that
components. All of these forces create drag not from the
of the two items when allowed to interfere with one another.
production of lift but the movement of an object through an
air mass. Parasite drag increases with speed and includes skin
friction drag, interference drag, and form drag.
4-3

• Form Drag
deceleration is commonly used to indicate a decrease. This
law governs the aircraft’s ability to change flightpath and
Form drag is the drag created because of the shape of a
speed, which are controlled by attitude (both pitch and bank)
component or the aircraft. If one were to place a circular
and thrust inputs. Speeding up, slowing down, entering
disk in an air stream, the pressure on both the top and bottom
climbs or descents, and turning are examples of accelerations
would be equal. However, the airflow starts to break down
that the pilot controls in everyday flight. [Figure 4-5]
as the air flows around the back of the disk. This creates
turbulence and hence a lower pressure results. Because the
total pressure is affected by this reduced pressure, it creates
a drag. Newer aircraft are generally made with consideration
Time
to this by fairing parts along the fuselage (teardrop) so that
turbulence and form drag is reduced.
Total lift must overcome the total weight of the aircraft, which
is comprised of the actual weight and the tail-down force used
150 hp
2,000 lb
to control the aircraft’s pitch attitude. Thrust must overcome
total drag in order to provide forward speed with which to
produce lift. Understanding how the aircraft’s relationship
Force
between these elements and the environment provide proper
= Acceleration
Mass
300 hp
interpretation of the aircraft’s instruments.
2,000 lb
Newton’s First Law, the Law of Inertia
Newton’s First Law of Motion is the Law of Inertia. It states
Figure 4-5. Newton’s Second Law of Motion: the Law of Momentum.
that a body at rest will remain at rest, and a body in motion
will remain in motion, at the same speed and in the same
Newton’s Third Law, the Law of Reaction
direction until affected by an outside force. The force with
which a body offers resistance to change is called the force of
Newton’s Third Law of Motion is the Law of Reaction,
inertia. Two outside forces are always present on an aircraft
which states that for every action there is an equal and
in flight: gravity and drag. The pilot uses pitch and thrust
opposite reaction. As shown in Figure 4-6, the action of
controls to counter or change these forces to maintain the
the jet engine’s thrust or the pull of the propeller lead to the
desired flightpath. If a pilot reduces power while in straight-
reaction of the aircraft’s forward motion. This law is also
and-level flight, the aircraft will slow due to drag. However,
responsible for a portion of the lift that is produced by a wing,
as the aircraft slows there is a reduction of lift, which causes
from the downward deflection of the airflow around it. This
the aircraft to begin a descent due to gravity. [Figure 4-4]
downward force of the relative wind results in an equal but
opposite (upward) lifting force created by the airflow over
Newton’s Second Law, the Law of Momentum
the wing. [Figure 4-6]
Newton’s Second Law of Motion is the Law of Momentum,
Atmosphere
which states that a body will accelerate in the same direction
as the force acting upon that body, and the acceleration
The atmosphere is the envelope of air which surrounds the
will be directly proportional to the net force and inversely
Earth. A given volume of dry air contains about 78 percent
proportional to the mass of the body. Acceleration refers
nitrogen, 21 percent oxygen, and about 1 percent other gases
either to an increase or decrease in velocity, although
such as argon, carbon dioxide, and others to a lesser degree.
Outside
Net
force
forces
_—
i
—_—
—
Path
a
rr
GG
Net forces
Apply down
j
elevator
Path
Figure 4-4. Newton’s First Law of Motion: the Law of Inertia.
4-4

In the standard atmosphere, sea level pressure is 29.92 inches
of mercury ("Hg) and the temperature is 15 °C (59 °F). The
standard lapse rate for pressure is approximately a 1 "Hg
decrease per 1,000 feet increase in altitude. The standard
lapse rate for temperature is a 2 °C (3.6 °F) decrease per
1,000 feet increase, up to the top of the stratosphere. Since
all aircraft performance is compared and evaluated in
Reaction
Action
the environment of the standard atmosphere, all aircraft
performance instrumentation is calibrated for the standard
Reaction
atmosphere. Because the actual operating conditions rarely,
eee
if ever, fit the standard atmosphere, certain corrections must
apply to the instrumentation and aircraft performance. For
Action
instance, at 10,000 ISA predicts that the air pressure should be
19.92 "Hg (29.92 "Hg – 10 "Hg = 19.92 "Hg) and the outside
temperature at –5 °C (15 °C – 20 °C). If the temperature
or the pressure is different than the International Standard
Figure 4-6. Newton’s Third Law of Motion: the Law of Reaction.
Atmosphere (ISA) prediction an adjustment must be made to
Although seemingly light, air does have weight and a one
performance predictions and various instrument indications.
square inch column of the atmosphere at sea level weighs
approximately 14.7 pounds. About one-half of the air by
Pressure Altitude
weight is within the first 18,000 feet. The remainder of the
Pressure altitude is the height above the standard datum
air is spread over a vertical distance in excess of 1,000 miles.
plane (SDP). The aircraft altimeter is essentially a sensitive
barometer calibrated to indicate altitude in the standard
Air density is a result of the relationship between temperature
atmosphere. If the altimeter is set for 29.92 "Hg SDP, the
and pressure. Air density is inversely related to temperature
altitude indicated is the pressure altitude-the altitude in the
and directly related to pressure. For a constant pressure to be
standard atmosphere corresponding to the sensed pressure.
maintained as temperature increases, density must decrease,
and vice versa. For a constant temperature to be maintained
The SDP is a theoretical level where the pressure of the
as pressure increases, density must increase, and vice versa.
atmosphere is 29.92 "Hg and the weight of air is 14.7 psi.
These relationships provide a basis for understanding
As atmospheric pressure changes, the SDP may be below,
instrument indications and aircraft performance.
at, or above sea level. Pressure altitude is important as a
basis for determining aircraft performance, as well as for
Layers of the Atmosphere
assigning flight levels to aircraft operating at or above 18,000
There are several layers to the atmosphere with the
feet. The pressure altitude can be determined by either of
troposphere being closest to the Earth’s surface extending to
two methods: (1) by setting the barometric scale of the
about 60,000 feet at the equator. Following is the stratosphere,
altimeter to 29.92 "Hg and reading the indicated altitude, or
mesosphere, ionosphere, thermosphere, and finally the
(2) by applying a correction factor to the indicated altitude
exosphere. The tropopause is the thin layer between the
according to the reported altimeter setting.
troposphere and the stratosphere. It varies in both thickness
and altitude but is generally defined where the standard
Density Altitude
lapse (generally accepted at 2 °C per 1,000 feet) decreases
Density altitude is pressure altitude corrected for nonstandard
significantly (usually down to 1 °C or less).
temperature. As the density of the air increases (lower
density altitude), aircraft performance increases. Conversely,
International Standard Atmosphere (ISA)
as air density decreases (higher density altitude), aircraft
The International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO)
performance decreases. A decrease in air density means a
established the ICAO Standard Atmosphere as a way
high density altitude; an increase in air density means a lower
of creating an international standard for reference and
density altitude. Density altitude is used in calculating aircraft
performance computations. Instrument indications and
performance. Under standard atmospheric conditions, air at
aircraft performance specifications are derived using this
each level in the atmosphere has a specific density; under
standard as a reference. Because the standard atmosphere is
standard conditions, pressure altitude and density altitude
a derived set of conditions that rarely exist in reality, pilots
identify the same level. Density altitude, then, is the vertical
need to understand how deviations from the standard affect
distance above sea level in the standard atmosphere at which
both instrument indications and aircraft performance.
a given density is to be found. It can be computed using
4-5

a Koch Chart or a flight computer with a density altitude
function. [Figure 4-7]
1.8
Stall
1.6
CL-MAX
1.5
Lift Coefficient - CL
Altitude and Temperature Effects
1.4
TO FIND the effect of altitude temperature
1.2
CONNECT the temperature and airport altitude by straight line
1.0
READ the increase in take-off distance and the decrease in rate of
climb from standard sea level values here
0.8
0.6
Airport pressure altitude—Thousand of feet
0.4
(read your altmeter set to 29.92 "Hg)
Percent decrease
0.2
in rate of climb
-
a
|
Angle of Attack (degrees)
Figure 4-8. Relationship of lift to AOA.
−10
Add this percent to your
reduced, pitch must be increased. The pilot controls pitch
−20
normal take off distance
−30
through the elevators, which control the AOA. When back
−2
−40
pressure is applied on the elevator control, the tail lowers
and the nose rises, thus increasing the wing’s AOA and lift.
Figure 4-7. Koch chart sample.
Under most conditions the elevator is placing downward
pressure on the tail. This pressure requires energy that is
If a chart is not available, the density altitude can be estimated
taken from aircraft performance (speed). Therefore, when
by adding 120 feet for every degree Celsius above the ISA. For
the CG is closer to the aft portion of the aircraft the elevator
example, at 3,000 feet PA, the ISA prediction is 9 °C (15 °C –
downward forces are less. This results in less energy used for
[lapse rate of 2 °C per 1,000 feet x 3 = 6 °C]). However, if the
downward forces, in turn resulting in more energy applied
actual temperature is 20 °C (11 °C more than that predicted
to aircraft performance.
by ISA) then the difference of 11 °C is multiplied by 120 feet
equaling 1,320. Adding this figure to the original 3,000 feet
Thrust is controlled by using the throttle to establish or
provides a density altitude of 4,320 feet (3,000 feet + 1,320 feet).
maintain desired airspeeds. The most precise method
of controlling flightpath is to use pitch control while
Lift
simultaneously using power (thrust) to control airspeed. In
order to maintain a constant lift, a change in pitch requires a
Lift always acts in a direction perpendicular to the relative
change in power, and vice versa.
wind and to the lateral axis of the aircraft. The fact that lift is
referenced to the wing, not to the Earth’s surface, is the source
If the pilot wants the aircraft to accelerate while maintaining
of many errors in learning flight control. Lift is not always
altitude, thrust must be increased to overcome drag. As
“up.” Its direction relative to the Earth’s surface changes as
the aircraft speeds up, lift is increased. To prevent gaining
the pilot maneuvers the aircraft.
altitude, the pitch angle must be lowered to reduce the AOA
and maintain altitude. To decelerate while maintaining
The magnitude of the force of lift is directly proportional to
altitude, thrust must be decreased to less than the value of
the density of the air, the area of the wings, and the airspeed.
drag. As the aircraft slows down, lift is reduced. To prevent
It also depends upon the type of wing and the AOA. Lift
losing altitude, the pitch angle must be increased in order to
increases with an increase in AOA up to the stalling angle,
increase the AOA and maintain altitude.
at which point it decreases with any further increase in AOA.
In conventional aircraft, lift is therefore controlled by varying
Drag Curves
the AOA and speed.
When induced drag and parasite drag are plotted on a graph,
Pitch/Power Relationship
the total drag on the aircraft appears in the form of a “drag
An examination of Figure 4-8 illustrates the relationship
curve.” Graph A of Figure 4-9 shows a curve based on thrust
between pitch and power while controlling flightpath and
versus drag, which is primarily used for jet aircraft. Graph B
airspeed. In order to maintain a constant lift, as airspeed is
4-6

Jet Aircraft
Propeller-Driven Aircraft
A
B
4,000
Power Required Inches Hg
Parasite
Parasite
Total drag
Total power
power
drag
Thrust Required
3,000
required
required
Minimum
drag or
L/DMAX
L/DMAX
2,000
Minimum
power
required
1,000
Induced drag
Induced drag
Airspeed
Airspeed
Figure 4-9. Thrust and power required curves.
of Figure 4-9 is based on power versus drag, and it is used
additional power is needed to maintain a slower airspeed. This
for propeller-driven aircraft. This chapter focuses on power
region exists at speeds slower than the minimum drag point
versus drag charts for propeller-driven aircraft.
(L/DMAX on the thrust required curve, Figure 4-9) and is
primarily due to induced drag. Figure 4-10 shows how one
Understanding the drag curve can provide valuable insight
power setting can yield two speeds, points 1 and 2. This is
into the various performance parameters and limitations of
because at point 1 there is high induced drag and low parasite
the aircraft. Because power must equal drag to maintain a
drag, while at point 2 there is high parasite drag and low
steady airspeed, the curve can be either a drag curve or a
induced drag.
power required curve. The power required curve represents
the amount of power needed to overcome drag in order to
Region of
Region of
reversed
maintain a steady speed in level flight.
normal
command
command
The propellers used on most reciprocating engines achieve
Power Required
peak propeller efficiencies in the range of 80 to 88 percent.
As airspeed increases, the propeller efficiency increases until
it reaches its maximum. Any airspeed above this maximum
point causes a reduction in propeller efficiency. An engine
that produces 160 horsepower will have only about 80
percent of that power converted into available horsepower,
approximately 128 horsepower. The remainder is lost energy.
This is the reason the thrust and power available curves
Airspeed
change with speed.
Figure 4-10. Regions of command.
Regions of Command
The drag curve also illustrates the two regions of command:
Control Characteristics
the region of normal command, and the region of reversed
Most flying is conducted in the region of normal command:
command. The term “region of command” refers to the
for example, cruise, climb, and maneuvers. The region of
relationship between speed and the power required to
reversed command may be encountered in the slow-speed
maintain or change that speed. “Command” refers to the input
phases of flight during takeoff and landing; however, for
the pilot must give in terms of power or thrust to maintain a
most general aviation aircraft, this region is very small and
new speed once reached.
is below normal approach speeds.
The “region of normal command” occurs where power must
Flight in the region of normal command is characterized
be added to increase speed. This region exists at speeds higher
by a relatively strong tendency of the aircraft to maintain
than the minimum drag point primarily as a result of parasite
the trim speed. Flight in the region of reversed command is
drag. The “region of reversed command” occurs where
4-7

Reversed Command
characterized by a relatively weak tendency of the aircraft to
maintain the trim speed. In fact, it is likely the aircraft exhibits
The characteristics of flight in the region of reversed command
no inherent tendency to maintain the trim speed in this area.
are illustrated at point B on the curve in Figure 4-10. If the
For this reason, the pilot must give particular attention to
aircraft is established in steady, level flight at point B, lift is
precise control of airspeed when operating in the slow-speed
equal to weight, and the power available is set equal to the
phases of the region of reversed command.
power required. When the airspeed is increased greater than
point B, an excess of power exists. This causes the aircraft
Operation in the region of reversed command does not imply
to accelerate to an even higher speed. When the aircraft is
that great control difficulty and dangerous conditions exist.
slowed to some airspeed lower than point B, a deficiency
However, it does amplify errors of basic flying technique—
of power exists. The natural tendency of the aircraft is to
making proper flying technique and precise control of the
continue to slow to an even lower airspeed.
aircraft very important.
This tendency toward instability happens because the
Speed Stability
variation of excess power to either side of point B magnifies
Normal Command
the original change in speed. Although the static longitudinal
stability of the aircraft tries to maintain the original trimmed
The characteristics of flight in the region of normal command
condition, this instability is more of an influence because of
are illustrated at point A on the curve in Figure 4-11. If
the increased induced drag due to the higher AOA in slow-
the aircraft is established in steady, level flight at point A,
speed flight.
lift is equal to weight, and the power available is set equal
to the power required. If the airspeed is increased with no
Trim
changes to the power setting, a power deficiency exists.
The aircraft has a natural tendency to return to the initial
The term trim refers to employing adjustable aerodynamic
speed to balance power and drag. If the airspeed is reduced
devices on the aircraft to adjust forces so the pilot does not
with no changes to the power setting, an excess of power
have to manually hold pressure on the controls. One means is
exists. The aircraft has a natural tendency to speed up to
to employ trim tabs. A trim tab is a small, adjustable hinged
regain the balance between power and drag. Keeping the
surface, located on the trailing edge of the elevator, aileron,
aircraft in proper trim enhances this natural tendency. The
or rudder control surfaces. (Some aircraft use adjustable
static longitudinal stability of the aircraft tends to return the
stabilizers instead of trim tabs for pitch trim.) Trimming is
aircraft to the original trimmed condition.
accomplished by deflecting the tab in the direction opposite
to that in which the primary control surface must be held.
Region of
The force of the airflow striking the tab causes the main
reversed
Region of
control surface to be deflected to a position that corrects the
command
normal
unbalanced condition of the aircraft.
command
Power Required
Power
deficit
A
Because the trim tabs use airflow to function, trim is a function
Excess
of speed. Any change in speed results in the need to re-trim the
Power
power
aircraft. An aircraft properly trimmed in pitch seeks to return
deficit
to the original speed before the change. It is very important
Excess
for instrument pilots to keep the aircraft in constant trim. This
C
power
Little or no excess
B
reduces the pilot’s workload significantly, allowing attention
power or power deficit
to other duties without compromising aircraft control.
Airspeed
Slow-Speed Flight
Figure 4-11. Region of speed stability.
Anytime an aircraft is flying near the stalling speed or the
region of reversed command, such as in final approach for a
An aircraft flying in steady, level flight at point C is in
normal landing, the initial part of a go around, or maneuvering
equilibrium. [Figure 4-11] If the speed were increased
in slow flight, it is operating in what is called slow-speed flight.
or decreased slightly, the aircraft would tend to remain at
If the aircraft weighs 4,000 pounds, the lift produced by the
that speed. This is because the curve is relatively flat and
aircraft must be 4,000 pounds. When lift is less than 4,000
a slight change in speed does not produce any significant
pounds, the aircraft is no longer able to sustain level flight, and
excess or deficiency in power. It has the characteristic of
consequently descends. During intentional descents, this is an
neutral stability (i.e., the aircraft’s tendency is to remain at
important factor and is used in the total control of the aircraft.
the new speed).
4-8

However, because lift is required during low speed flight
and is characterized by high AOA, flaps or other high lift
devices are needed to either change the camber of the airfoil,
or delay the boundary level separation. Plain and split flaps
[Figure 4-12] are most commonly used to change the camber
of an airfoil. It should be noted that with the application of
flaps, the aircraft will stall at a lower AOA. For example,
if the basic wing stalls at 18° without flaps, then with the
addition of flaps to the CL-MAX position, the new AOA that
the wing will stall is 15°. However, the value of lift (flaps
extended to the CL-MAX position) produces more lift than lift
at 18° on the basic wing.
Figure 4-12. Plain and split flaps.
Delaying the boundary layer separation is another way to
increase CL-Max. Several methods are employed (such as
suction and use of a blowing boundary layer control), but the
most common device used on general aviation light aircraft
is the vortex generator. Small strips of metal placed along
the wing (usually in front of the control surfaces) create
turbulence. The turbulence in turn mixes high energy air from
outside the boundary layer with boundary layer air. The effect
is similar to other boundary layer devices. [Figure 4-13]
Small Airplanes
Most small airplanes maintain a speed well in excess of 1.3
times VSO on an instrument approach. An airplane with a
stall speed of 50 knots (VSO) has a normal approach speed
of 65 knots. However, this same airplane may maintain 90
knots (1.8 VSO) while on the final segment of an instrument
approach. The landing gear will most likely be extended at
the beginning of the descent to the minimum descent altitude,
or upon intercepting the glideslope of the instrument landing
system. The pilot may also select an intermediate flap setting
for this phase of the approach. The airplane at this speed has
good positive speed stability, as represented by point A on
Figure 4-11. Flying in this regime permits the pilot to make
slight pitch changes without changing power settings, and
Plain
Split
Fowler
Slotted
i
Uncontrolled Turbulence
i
Controlled Vortices
Figure 4-13. Vortex generators.
accept minor speed changes knowing that when the pitch is
returned to the initial setting, the speed returns to the original
setting. This reduces the pilot’s workload.
Aircraft are usually slowed to a normal landing speed when
on the final approach just prior to landing. When slowed to
65 knots, (1.3 VSO), the airplane will be close to point C.
[Figure 4-14] At this point, precise control of the pitch and
power becomes more crucial for maintaining the correct speed.
Pitch and power coordination is necessary because the speed
stability is relatively neutral since the speed tends to remain
at the new value and not return to the original setting. In
addition to the need for more precise airspeed control, the pilot
normally changes the aircraft’s configuration by extending
landing flaps. This configuration change means the pilot must
be alert to unwanted pitch changes at a low altitude.
4-9

Excess power is the available power over and above that
Vertical
required to maintain horizontal flight at a given speed.
L
component of lift
Although the terms power and thrust are sometimes
Resultant lift
used interchangeably (erroneously implying they are
synonymous), distinguishing between the two is important
L
y
when considering climb performance. Work is the product of
a force moving through a distance and is usually independent
Horizontal
of time. Power implies work rate or units of work per unit
component of lift
N
'
of time, and as such is a function of the speed at which the
y
, |
~*~
NN]
force is developed. Thrust, also a function of work, means
_—
the force which imparts a change in the velocity of a mass.
L
During takeoff, the aircraft does not stall even though it
may be in a climb near the stall speed. The reason is that
Weight
excess power (used to produce thrust) is used during this
W
flight regime. Therefore, it is important if an engine fails
after takeoff, to compensate the loss of thrust with pitch
Figure 4-14. Forces in a turn.
and airspeed.
If allowed to slow several knots, the airplane could enter
For a given weight of the aircraft, the angle of climb depends
the region of reversed command. At this point, the airplane
on the difference between thrust and drag, or the excess
could develop an unsafe sink rate and continue to lose speed
thrust. When the excess thrust is zero, the inclination of the
unless the pilot takes a prompt corrective action. Proper pitch
flightpath is zero, and the aircraft is in steady, level flight.
and power coordination is critical in this region due to speed
When thrust is greater than drag, the excess thrust allows a
instability and the tendency of increased divergence from
climb angle depending on the amount of excess thrust. When
the desired speed.
thrust is less than drag, the deficiency of thrust induces an
angle of descent.
Large Airplanes
Pilots of larger airplanes with higher stall speeds may find the
Acceleration in Cruise Flight
speed they maintain on the instrument approach is near 1.3
Aircraft accelerate in level flight because of an excess of
VSO, putting them near point C [Figure 4-11] the entire time
power over what is required to maintain a steady speed. This
the airplane is on the final approach segment. In this case,
is the same excess power used to climb. Upon reaching the
precise speed control is necessary throughout the approach. It
desired altitude with pitch being lowered to maintain that
may be necessary to temporarily select excessive, or deficient
altitude, the excess power now accelerates the aircraft to its
thrust in relation to the target thrust setting in order to quickly
cruise speed. However, reducing power too soon after level
correct for airspeed deviations.
off results in a longer period of time to accelerate.
For example, a pilot is on an instrument approach at 1.3
Turns
VSO, a speed near L/DMAX, and knows that a certain power
setting maintains that speed. The airplane slows several knots
Like any moving object, an aircraft requires a sideward force
below the desired speed because of a slight reduction in the
to make it turn. In a normal turn, this force is supplied by
power setting. The pilot increases the power slightly, and the
banking the aircraft in order to exert lift inward, as well as
airplane begins to accelerate, but at a slow rate. Because the
upward. The force of lift is separated into two components
airplane is still in the “flat part” of the drag curve, this slight
at right angles to each other. [Figure 4-14] The upward
increase in power will not cause a rapid return to the desired
acting lift together with the opposing weight becomes the
speed. The pilot may need to increase the power higher
vertical lift component. The horizontally acting lift and its
than normally needed to maintain the new speed, allow the
opposing centrifugal force are the horizontal lift component,
airplane to accelerate, then reduce the power to the setting
or centripetal force. This horizontal lift component is the
that maintains the desired speed.
sideward force that causes an aircraft to turn. The equal and
opposite reaction to this sideward force is centrifugal force,
Climbs
which is merely an apparent force as a result of inertia.
The ability for an aircraft to climb depends upon an excess
power or thrust over what it takes to maintain equilibrium.
4-10

The relationship between the aircraft’s speed and bank angle
turn, while decreasing the bank angle increases the radius of
to the rate and radius of turns is important for instrument
turn. This means that intercepting a course at a higher speed
pilots to understand. The pilot can use this knowledge to
requires more distance, and therefore, requires a longer lead.
properly estimate bank angles needed for certain rates of turn,
If the speed is slowed considerably in preparation for holding
or to determine how much to lead when intercepting a course.
or an approach, a shorter lead is needed than that required for
cruise flight.
Rate of Turn
Coordination of Rudder and Aileron Controls
The rate of turn, normally measured in degrees per second,
is based upon a set bank angle at a set speed. If either one
Any time ailerons are used, adverse yaw is produced. Adverse
of these elements changes, the rate of turn changes. If the
yaw is caused when the ailerons are deflected as a roll motion
aircraft increases its speed without changing the bank angle,
(as in turn) is initiated. In a right turn, the right aileron is
the rate of turn decreases. Likewise, if the speed decreases
deflected upward while the left is deflected downward. Lift is
without changing the bank angle, the rate of turn increases.
increased on the left side and reduced on the right, resulting
in a bank to the right. However, as a result of producing lift
Changing the bank angle without changing speed also causes
on the left, induced drag is also increased on the left side.
the rate of turn to change. Increasing the bank angle without
The drag causes the left wing to slow down, in turn causing
changing speed increases the rate of turn, while decreasing
the nose of the aircraft to initially move (left) in the direction
the bank angle reduces the rate of turn.
opposite of the turn. Correcting for this yaw with rudder, when
entering and exiting turns, is necessary for precise control of
The standard rate of turn, 3° per second, is used as the main
the airplane when flying on instruments. The pilot can tell if
reference for bank angle. Therefore, the pilot must understand
the turn is coordinated by checking the ball in the turn-and-
how the angle of bank varies with speed changes, such
slip indicator or the turn coordinator. [Figure 4-16]
as slowing down for holding or an instrument approach.
Figure 4-15 shows the turn relationship with reference to a
As the aircraft banks to enter a turn, a portion of the wing’s
constant bank angle or a constant airspeed, and the effects on
vertical lift becomes the horizontal component; therefore,
rate of turn and radius of turn. A rule of thumb for determining
without an increase in back pressure, the aircraft loses altitude
the standard rate turn is to divide the airspeed by ten and
during the turn. The loss of vertical lift can be offset by
add 7. An aircraft with an airspeed of 90 knots takes a bank
increasing the pitch in one-half bar width increments. Trim
angle of 16° to maintain a standard rate turn (90 divided by
may be used to relieve the control pressures; however, if used,
10 plus 7 equals 16°).
it has to be removed once the turn is complete.
Radius of Turn
In a slipping turn, the aircraft is not turning at the rate
appropriate to the bank being used, and the aircraft falls to
The radius of turn varies with changes in either speed or
the inside of the turn. The aircraft is banked too much for the
bank. If the speed is increased without changing the bank
rate of turn, so the horizontal lift component is greater than
angle, the radius of turn increases, and vice versa. If the speed
the centrifugal force. A skidding turn results from excess of
is constant, increasing the bank angle reduces the radius of
wz
—
—
—
—_—_
,
i
i
wii
wi
-
—_—
——_
Radius≈1,500
Radius≈3,500
Radius≈6,500
Radius≈8,000
Radius≈3,500
Radius≈2,000
Figure 4-15. Turns.
4-11

j
j
j
i
ee
“~
“|
“~
—_—
|
—_—
—
—
—
~ I
~ F
a
Coordinated Turn
Slipping Turn
Skidding Turn
al
al
al
al
al
al
a
a
P~
a
a
a
D.C.
D.C.
D.C.
ELEC.
ELEC.
ELEC.
L
R
L
R
L
R
TURN COORDINATOR
TURN COORDINATOR
TURN COORDINATOR
L
R
L
R
L
R
2 MIN.
2 MIN.
2 MIN.
2 MIN TURN
2 MIN TURN
2 MIN TURN
NO PITCH
NO PITCH
NO PITCH
DC ELEC
DC ELEC
DC ELEC
INFORMATION
INFORMATION
INFORMATION
|
|
|
|
os
oo_—
oo——
|
_——
——
os
os
os
|
Coordinated Turn
Slipping Turn
Skidding Turn
rudder into turn
Note the slight differences in rudder placement.
Figure 4-16. Adverse yaw.
Load Factor
centrifugal force over the horizontal lift component, pulling
the aircraft toward the outside of the turn. The rate of turn
Any force applied to an aircraft to deflect its flight from a
is too great for the angle of bank, so the horizontal lift
straight line produces a stress on its structure; the amount of
component is less than the centrifugal force.
this force is termed load factor. A load factor is the ratio of
the aerodynamic force on the aircraft to the gross weight of
An inclinometer, located in the turn coordinator, or turn and
the aircraft (e.g., lift/weight). For example, a load factor of 3
bank indicator indicates the quality of the turn, and should
means the total load on an aircraft’s structure is three times
be centered when the wings are banked. If the ball is off of
its gross weight. When designing an aircraft, it is necessary
center on the side toward the turn, the aircraft is slipping and
to determine the highest load factors that can be expected in
rudder pressure should be added on that side to increase the
normal operation under various operational situations. These
rate of turn or the bank angle should be reduced. If the ball
“highest” load factors are called “limit load factors.”
is off of center on the side away from the turn, the aircraft
is skidding and rudder pressure toward the turn should be
Aircraft are placed in various categories (i.e., normal, utility,
relaxed or the bank angle should be increased. If the aircraft
and acrobatic) depending upon the load factors they are
is properly rigged, the ball should be in the center when the
designed to take. For reasons of safety, the aircraft must be
wings are level; use rudder and/or aileron trim if available.
designed to withstand certain maximum load factors without
any structural damage.
The increase in induced drag (caused by the increase in
AOA necessary to maintain altitude) results in a minor loss
of airspeed if the power setting is not changed.
4-12

The specified load may be expected in terms of aerodynamic
forces, as in turns. In level flight in undisturbed air, the
wings are supporting not only the weight of the aircraft, but
centrifugal force as well. As the bank steepens, the horizontal
lift component increases, centrifugal force increases, and the
load factor increases. If the load factor becomes so great that
an increase in AOA cannot provide enough lift to support
the load, the wing stalls. Since the stalling speed increases
directly with the square root of the load factor, the pilot
should be aware of the flight conditions during which the
load factor can become critical. Steep turns at slow airspeed,
structural ice accumulation, and vertical gusts in turbulent
air can increase the load factor to a critical level.
Icing
One of the greatest hazards to flight is aircraft icing. The
instrument pilot must be aware of the conditions conducive to
aircraft icing. These conditions include the types of icing, the
effects of icing on aircraft control and performance, effects
of icing on aircraft systems, and the use and limitations of
aircraft deice and anti-ice equipment. Coping with the hazards
of icing begins with preflight planning to determine where
icing may occur during a flight and ensuring the aircraft is
free of ice and frost prior to takeoff. This attention to detail
extends to managing deice and anti-ice systems properly
during the flight, because weather conditions may change
rapidly, and the pilot must be able to recognize when a change
of flight plan is required.
Types of Icing
Structural Icing
Structural icing refers to the accumulation of ice on the
exterior of the aircraft. Ice forms on aircraft structures and
surfaces when super-cooled droplets impinge on them and
freeze. Small and/or narrow objects are the best collectors
of droplets and ice up most rapidly. This is why a small
protuberance within sight of the pilot can be used as an “ice
evidence probe.” It is generally one of the first parts of the
airplane on which an appreciable amount of ice forms. An
aircraft’s tailplane is a better collector than its wings, because
the tailplane presents a thinner surface to the airstream.
Induction Icing
Ice in the induction system can reduce the amount of air
available for combustion. The most common example of
reciprocating engine induction icing is carburetor ice. Most
pilots are familiar with this phenomenon, which occurs when
moist air passes through a carburetor venturi and is cooled. As
a result of this process, ice may form on the venturi walls and
throttle plate, restricting airflow to the engine. This may occur
at temperatures between 20 °F (–7 °C) and 70 °F (21 °C).
The problem is remedied by applying carburetor heat, which
uses the engine’s own exhaust as a heat source to melt the
ice or prevent its formation. On the other hand, fuel-injected
aircraft engines usually are less vulnerable to icing but still
can be affected if the engine’s air source becomes blocked
with ice. Manufacturers provide an alternate air source that
may be selected in case the normal system malfunctions.
In turbojet aircraft, air that is drawn into the engines creates
an area of reduced pressure at the inlet, which lowers the
temperature below that of the surrounding air. In marginal
icing conditions (i.e., conditions where icing is possible),
this reduction in temperature may be sufficient to cause ice
to form on the engine inlet, disrupting the airflow into the
engine. Another hazard occurs when ice breaks off and is
ingested into a running engine, which can cause damage to
fan blades, engine compressor stall, or combustor flameout.
When anti-icing systems are used, runback water also can
refreeze on unprotected surfaces of the inlet and, if excessive,
reduce airflow into the engine or distort the airflow pattern in
such a manner as to cause compressor or fan blades to vibrate,
possibly damaging the engine. Another problem in turbine
engines is the icing of engine probes used to set power levels
(for example, engine inlet temperature or engine pressure ratio
(EPR) probes), which can lead to erroneous readings of engine
instrumentation operational difficulties or total power loss.
The type of ice that forms can be classified as clear, rime, or
mixed, based on the structure and appearance of the ice. The
type of ice that forms varies depending on the atmospheric
and flight conditions in which it forms. Significant structural
icing on an aircraft can cause serious aircraft control and
performance problems.
Clear Ice
A glossy, transparent ice formed by the relatively slow
freezing of super cooled water is referred to as clear ice.
[Figure 4-17] The terms “clear” and “glaze” have been used
Figure 4-17. Clear ice.
Clear Ice
4-13

for essentially the same type of ice accretion. This type of
r i
‘4
ice is denser, harder, and sometimes more transparent than
rime ice. With larger accretions, clear ice may form “horns.”
[Figure 4-18] Temperatures close to the freezing point, large
amounts of liquid water, high aircraft velocities, and large
droplets are conducive to the formation of clear ice.
‘4
Rime Ice
Figure 4-19. Rime ice.
Mixed Ice
Mixed ice is a combination of clear and rime ice formed on
the same surface. It is the shape and roughness of the ice
that is most important from an aerodynamic point of view.
Clear Ice Buildup with Horns
General Effects of Icing on Airfoils
Figure 4-18. Clear ice buildup with horns.
The most hazardous aspect of structural icing is its aerodynamic
effects. [Figure 4-20] Ice alters the shape of an airfoil, reducing
Rime Ice
the maximum coefficient of lift and AOA at which the aircraft
A rough, milky, opaque ice formed by the instantaneous or
stalls. Note that at very low AOAs, there may be little or no
very rapid freezing of super cooled droplets as they strike
effect of the ice on the coefficient of lift. Therefore, when
the aircraft is known as rime ice. [Figure 4-19] The rapid
cruising at a low AOA, ice on the wing may have little effect
freezing results in the formation of air pockets in the ice,
on the lift. However, note that the ice significantly reduces
giving it an opaque appearance and making it porous and
the CL-max, and the AOA at which it occurs (the stall angle)
brittle. For larger accretions, rime ice may form a streamlined
is much lower. Thus, when slowing down and increasing the
extension of the wing. Low temperatures, lesser amounts of
AOA for approach, the pilot may find that ice on the wing,
liquid water, low velocities, and small droplets are conducive
which had little effect on lift in cruise now, causes stall to
to the formation of rime ice.
Airfoil
with ice
CD (coefficient of drag)
CL (coefficient of lift)
Clean
airfoil
Clean
airfoil
Airfoil
with ice
Angle of Attack
Angle of Attack
Figure 4-20. Aerodynamic effects of icing.
4-14

occur at a lower AOA and higher speed. Even a thin layer of
ice at the leading edge of a wing, especially if it is rough, can
have a significant effect in increasing stall speed. For large
ice shapes, especially those with horns, the lift may also be
reduced at a lower AOA. The accumulation of ice affects the
coefficient of drag of the airfoil. [Figure 4-20] Note that the
effect is significant even at very small AOAs.
A significant reduction in CL-max and a reduction in the
AOA where stall occurs can result from a relatively small
ice accretion. A reduction of CL-max by 30 percent is not
unusual, and a large horn ice accretion can result in reductions
of 40 percent to 50 percent. Drag tends to increase steadily
as ice accretes. An airfoil drag increase of 100 percent is not
unusual, and for large horn ice accretions, the increase can
be 200 percent or even higher.
Ice on an airfoil can have other effects not depicted in these
curves. Even before airfoil stall, there can be changes in the
pressure over the airfoil that may affect a control surface at
the trailing edge. Furthermore, on takeoff, approach, and
landing, the wings of many aircraft are multi-element airfoils
with three or more elements. Ice may affect the different
elements in different ways. Ice may also affect the way in
which the air streams interact over the elements.
Ice can partially block or limit control surfaces, which
limits or makes control movements ineffective. Also, if the
extra weight caused by ice accumulation is too great, the
aircraft may not be able to become airborne and, if in flight,
the aircraft may not be able to maintain altitude. Therefore
any accumulation of ice or frost should be removed before
attempting flight.
Another hazard of structural icing is the possible uncommanded
and uncontrolled roll phenomenon, referred to as roll upset,
associated with severe inflight icing. Pilots flying aircraft
certificated for flight in known icing conditions should be
aware that severe icing is a condition outside of the aircraft’s
certification icing envelope. Roll upset may be caused by
airflow separation (aerodynamic stall), which induces self-
deflection of the ailerons and loss of or degraded roll handling
characteristics [Figure 4-21]. These phenomena can result
from severe icing conditions without the usual symptoms of
ice accumulation or a perceived aerodynamic stall.
Most aircraft have a nose-down pitching moment from the
wings because the CG is ahead of the CP. It is the role of the
tailplane to counteract this moment by providing a downward
force. [Figure 4-22] The result of this configuration is that
actions which move the wing away from stall, such as
Leading Edge Ice Formations
Upper Surface Frost
CL-MAX
w
f
i
Angle of Attack
Figure 4-21. Effect of ice and frost on lift.
C of L
ee
st
Tail download
CG
Weight
Figure 4-22. Downward force on the tailplane.
deployment of flaps or increasing speed, may increase the
negative AOA of the tail. With ice on the tailplane, it may
stall after full or partial deployment of flaps. [Figure 4-23]
Since the tailplane is ordinarily thinner than the wing, it is a
more efficient collector of ice. On most aircraft the tailplane
is not visible to the pilot, who therefore cannot observe how
well it has been cleared of ice by any deicing system. Thus, it
is important that the pilot be alert to the possibility of tailplane
stall, particularly on approach and landing.
4-15

If any of the above symptoms occur, the pilot should:
CG
•
Immediately retract the flaps to the previous setting
and apply appropriate nose-up elevator pressure;
_
•
Increase airspeed appropriately for the reduced flap
_
——
a
extension setting;
|
Icing
•
Apply sufficient power for aircraft configuration
. 2
and conditions. (High engine power settings may
adversely impact response to tailplane stall conditions
Aircraft nose
Weight
at high airspeed in some aircraft designs. Observe the
pitches down
manufacturer’s recommendations regarding power
settings.);
Figure 4-23. Ice on the tailplane.
•
Make nose-down pitch changes slowly, even in
gusting conditions, if circumstances allow; and
Piper PA-34-200T (Des Moines, Iowa)
•
If a pneumatic deicing system is used, operate the
The pilot of this flight, which took place on January 9,
system several times in an attempt to clear the tailplane
1996, said that upon crossing the runway threshold and
of ice.
lowering the flaps 25°, “the airplane pitched down.” The
pilot “immediately released the flaps and added power, but
Once a tailplane stall is encountered, the stall condition
the airplane was basically uncontrollable at this point.” The
tends to worsen with increased airspeed and possibly may
pilot reduced power and lowered the flaps before striking
worsen with increased power settings at the same flap
the runway on its centerline and sliding 1,000 feet before
setting. Airspeed, at any flap setting, in excess of the airplane
coming to a stop. The accident resulted in serious injury to
manufacturer’s recommendations, accompanied by uncleared
the pilot, the sole occupant.
ice contaminating the tailplane, may result in a tailplane stall
and uncommanded pitch down from which recovery may not
Examination of the wreckage revealed heavy impact
be possible. A tailplane stall may occur at speeds less than
damage to the airplane’s forward fuselage, engines, and
the maximum flap extended speed (VFE).
wings. Approximately one-half inch of rime ice was
observed adhering to the leading edges of the left and right
Propeller Icing
horizontal stabilizers and along the leading edge of the
Ice buildup on propeller blades reduces thrust for the same
vertical stabilizer.
aerodynamic reasons that wings tend to lose lift and increase
drag when ice accumulates on them. The greatest quantity
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB)
of ice normally collects on the spinner and inner radius of
determined the probable cause of the accident was the pilot’s
the propeller. Propeller areas on which ice may accumulate
failure to use the airplane’s deicing system, which resulted
and be ingested into the engine normally are anti-iced rather
in an accumulation of empennage ice and a tailplane stall.
than deiced to reduce the probability of ice being shed into
Factors relating to this accident were the icing conditions
the engine.
and the pilot’s intentional flight into those known conditions.
Tailplane Stall Symptoms
Effects of Icing on Critical Aircraft Systems
Any of the following symptoms, occurring singly or in
In addition to the hazards of structural and induction icing,
combination, may be a warning of tailplane icing:
the pilot must be aware of other aircraft systems susceptible
to icing. The effects of icing do not produce the performance
•
Elevator control pulsing, oscillations, or vibrations;
loss of structural icing or the power loss of induction icing
•
Abnormal nose-down trim change;
but can present serious problems to the instrument pilot.
•
Any other unusual or abnormal pitch anomalies
Examples of such systems are flight instruments, stall
(possibly resulting in pilot induced oscillations);
warning systems, and windshields.
•
Reduction or loss of elevator effectiveness;
Flight Instruments
•
Sudden change in elevator force (control would move
Various aircraft instruments including the airspeed indicator,
nose-down if unrestrained); and
altimeter, and rate-of-climb indicator utilize pressures
•
Sudden uncommanded nose-down pitch.
sensed by pitot tubes and static ports for normal operation.
4-16