a
Chapter 11
Aircraft
Aircraft
Performance
Performance
Introduction
This chapter discusses the factors that affect aircraft
performance, which include the aircraft weight, atmospheric
conditions, runway environment, and the fundamental
physical laws governing the forces acting on an aircraft.
Importance of Performance Data
The performance or operational information section of the
Aircraft Flight Manual/Pilot’s Operating Handbook (AFM/
POH) contains the operating data for the aircraft; that is, the
data pertaining to takeoff, climb, range, endurance, descent,
and landing. The use of this data in flying operations is
mandatory for safe and efficient operation. Considerable
knowledge and familiarity of the aircraft can be gained by
studying this material.
11-1

It must be emphasized that the manufacturers’ information
and data furnished in the AFM/POH is not standardized.
Some provide the data in tabular form, while others use
graphs. In addition, the performance data may be presented
on the basis of standard atmospheric conditions, pressure
altitude, or density altitude. The performance information in
the AFM/POH has little or no value unless the user recognizes
those variations and makes the necessary adjustments.
To be able to make practical use of the aircraft’s capabilities
and limitations, it is essential to understand the significance
of the operational data. The pilot must be cognizant of the
basis for the performance data, as well as the meanings of
the various terms used in expressing performance capabilities
and limitations.
Since the characteristics of the atmosphere have a major
effect on performance, it is necessary to review two dominant
factors—pressure and temperature.
Structure of the Atmosphere
The atmosphere is an envelope of air that surrounds the
Earth and rests upon its surface. It is as much a part of the
Earth as is land and water. However, air differs from land
and water in that it is a mixture of gases. It has mass, weight,
and indefinite shape.
Air, like any other fluid, is able to flow and change its shape
when subjected to even minute pressures because of the
lack of strong molecular cohesion. For example, gas will
completely fill any container into which it is placed, expanding
or contracting to adjust its shape to the limits of the container.
The atmosphere is composed of 78 percent nitrogen, 21
percent oxygen, and 1 percent other gases, such as argon
or helium. Most of the oxygen is contained below 35,000
feet altitude.
Atmospheric Pressure
Though there are various kinds of pressure, pilots are mainly
concerned with atmospheric pressure. It is one of the basic
factors in weather changes, helps to lift the aircraft, and
actuates some of the most important flight instruments in the
aircraft. These instruments often include the altimeter, the
airspeed indicator (ASI), the vertical speed indicator (VSI),
and the manifold pressure gauge.
Though air is very light, it has mass and is affected by the
attraction of gravity. Therefore, like any other substance, it
has weight; because it has weight, it has force. Since it is a
fluid substance, this force is exerted equally in all directions,
and its effect on bodies within the air is called pressure.
Under standard conditions at sea level, the average pressure
11-2
exerted by the weight of the atmosphere is approximately 14.7
pounds per square inch (psi). The density of air has significant
effects on the aircraft’s performance. As air becomes less
dense, it reduces:
•
Power, because the engine takes in less air
•
Thrust, because the propeller is less efficient in thin air
•
Lift, because the thin air exerts less force on the airfoils
The pressure of the atmosphere may vary with time but more
importantly, it varies with altitude and temperature. Due to
the changing atmospheric pressure, a standard reference
was developed. The standard atmosphere at sea level has
a surface temperature of 59 degrees Fahrenheit (°F) or 15
degrees Celsius (°C) and a surface pressure of 29.92 inches
of mercury ("Hg) or 1013.2 millibars (mb). [Figure 11-1]
A standard temperature lapse rate is one in which the
temperature decreases at the rate of approximately 3.5 °F or
2 °C per thousand feet up to 36,000 feet. Above this point,
the temperature is considered constant up to 80,000 feet. A
standard pressure lapse rate is one in which pressure decreases
at a rate of approximately 1 "Hg per 1,000 feet of altitude gain
to 10,000 feet. [Figure 11-2] The International Civil Aviation
Organization (ICAO) has established this as a worldwide
standard, and it is often referred to as International Standard
Atmosphere (ISA) or ICAO Standard Atmosphere. Any
temperature or pressure that differs from the standard lapse
rates is considered nonstandard temperature and pressure.
Adjustments for nonstandard temperatures and pressures are
provided on the manufacturer’s performance charts.
Inches of
Millibars
Standard
Standard
Mercury
Sea Level
Sea Level
Pressure
Pressure
29.92"
Hg
mb
A t m o s p h e r i c P r e s s u r e
~
a”
”
a
Figure 11-1. Standard sea level pressure.

2. By applying a correction factor to the indicated
Temperature
Pressure
altitude according to the reported “altimeter setting,”
Altitude (ft)
("Hg)
(°C)
(°F)
[Figure 11-3]
59.0
15.0
29.92
3. By using a flight computer
55.4
13.0
28.86
1,000
51.9
11.0
27.82
2,000
48.3
9.1
26.82
3,000
Density Altitude
44.7
7.1
25.84
4,000
The more appropriate term for correlating aerodynamic
41.2
5.1
24.89
5,000
performance in the nonstandard atmosphere is density
37.6
3.1
23.98
6,000
altitude—the altitude in the standard atmosphere
34.0
1.1
23.09
7,000
30.5
−0.9
22.22
8,000
corresponding to a particular value of air density.
26.9
−2.8
21.38
9,000
23.3
−4.8
20.57
10,000
Density altitude is pressure altitude corrected for nonstandard
19.8
−6.8
19.79
11,000
temperature. As the density of the air increases (lower
16.2
−8.8
19.02
12,000
density altitude), aircraft performance increases. Conversely,
12.6
−10.8
18.29
13,000
9.1
−12.7
17.57
14,000
Method for Determining
5.5
−14.7
16.88
15,000
Alternate Method for Determining
Pressure Altitude
1.9
−16.7
16.21
16,000
Pressure Altitude
Altimeter
Altitude
−1.6
−18.7
15.56
17,000
setting
correction
−5.2
−20.7
14.94
18,000
28.0
1,824
−8.8
−22.6
14.33
19,000
28.1
1,727
−12.3
−24.6
13.74
20,000
28.2
1,630
28.3
1,533
Figure 11-2. Properties of standard atmosphere.
28.4
1,436
28.5
1,340
Since all aircraft performance is compared and evaluated
28.6
1,244
28.7
1,148
using the standard atmosphere, all aircraft instruments
28.8
1,053
are calibrated for the standard atmosphere. Thus, certain
28.9
corrections must apply to the instrumentation, as well as the
To field
Add
29.0
aircraft performance, if the actual operating conditions do
elevation
29.1
not fit the standard atmosphere. In order to account properly
29.2
for the nonstandard atmosphere, certain related terms must
29.3
be defined.
29.4
29.5
Pressure Altitude
29.6
Field elevation is sea level
q
29.7
Pressure altitude is the height above the standard datum
29.8
plane (SDP). The aircraft altimeter is essentially a sensitive
29.9
To get
barometer calibrated to indicate altitude in the standard
29.92
pressure altitude
atmosphere. If the altimeter is set for 29.92 "Hg SDP, the
30.0
−73
30.1
−165
altitude indicated is the pressure altitude—the altitude in the
30.2
−257
standard atmosphere corresponding to the sensed pressure.
30.3
−348
30.4
−440
Subtract
The SDP is a theoretical level at which the pressure of the
From field
30.5
−531
elevation
atmosphere is 29.92 "Hg and the weight of air is 14.7 psi. As
30.6
−622
atmospheric pressure changes, the SDP may be below, at, or
30.7
−712
above sea level. Pressure altitude is important as a basis for
30.8
−803
30.9
−893
determining aircraft performance, as well as for assigning
31.0
−983
flight levels to aircraft operating at above 18,000 feet.
Figure 11-3. Field elevation versus pressure. The aircraft is located
The pressure altitude can be determined by any of the three
on a field that happens to be at sea level. Set the altimeter to the
following methods:
current altimeter setting (29.7). The difference of 205 feet is added
1. By setting the barometric scale of the altimeter to
to the elevation or a PA of 205 feet.
29.92 "Hg and reading the indicated altitude,
11-3

as air density decreases (higher density altitude), aircraft
performance decreases. A decrease in air density means a
high density altitude; an increase in air density means a lower
density altitude. Density altitude is used in calculating aircraft
performance. Under standard atmospheric condition, air at
each level in the atmosphere has a specific density; under
standard conditions, pressure altitude and density altitude
identify the same level. Density altitude, then, is the vertical
distance above sea level in the standard atmosphere at which
a given density is to be found.
Density altitude is computed using pressure altitude and
temperature. Since aircraft performance data at any level is
based upon air density under standard day conditions, such
performance data apply to air density levels that may not be
identical to altimeter indications. Under conditions higher
or lower than standard, these levels cannot be determined
directly from the altimeter.
Density altitude is determined by first finding pressure
altitude and then correcting this altitude for nonstandard
temperature variations. Since density varies directly with
pressure, and inversely with temperature, a given pressure
altitude may exist for a wide range of temperature by allowing
the density to vary. However, a known density occurs for
any one temperature and pressure altitude. The density of the
air, of course, has a pronounced effect on aircraft and engine
performance. Regardless of the actual altitude at which
the aircraft is operating, it will perform as though it were
operating at an altitude equal to the existing density altitude.
For example, when set at 29.92 "Hg, the altimeter may
indicate a pressure altitude of 5,000 feet. According to the
AFM/POH, the ground run on takeoff may require a distance
of 790 feet under standard temperature conditions. However,
if the temperature is 20 °C above standard, the expansion of
air raises the density level. Using temperature correction data
from tables or graphs, or by deriving the density altitude with
a computer, it may be found that the density level is above
7,000 feet, and the ground run may be closer to 1,000 feet.
Air density is affected by changes in altitude, temperature,
and humidity. High density altitude refers to thin air while
low density altitude refers to dense air. The conditions that
result in a high density altitude are high elevations, low
atmospheric pressures, high temperatures, high humidity, or
some combination of these factors. Lower elevations, high
atmospheric pressure, low temperatures, and low humidity
are more indicative of low density altitude.
Using a flight computer, density altitude can be computed by
inputting the pressure altitude and outside air temperature at
11-4
flight level. Density altitude can also be determined by referring
to the table and chart in Figures 11-3 and 11-4 respectively.
Effects of Pressure on Density
Since air is a gas, it can be compressed or expanded. When
air is compressed, a greater amount of air can occupy a
given volume. Conversely, when pressure on a given volume
of air is decreased, the air expands and occupies a greater
space. That is, the original column of air at a lower pressure
15,000
14,000
14,000
13,000
13,000
12,000
9,000 Pressure altitude (feet)
12,000
11,000
11,000
10,000
10,000
Standard temperature
9,000
8,000
8,000
7,000
Density altitude (feet)
7,000
6,000
6,000
5,000
5,000
4,000
4,000
3,000
3,000
2,000
2,000
1,000
Sea level
1,000
-2,000
-1,000
Sea level
-20°
-10°
0°
10°
20°
30°
40°
C
F
0° 10° 20° 30° 40° 50° 60° 70° 80° 90° 100°
Outside air temperature (OAT)
Figure 11-4. Density altitude chart.

contains a smaller mass of air. In other words, the density is
decreased. In fact, density is directly proportional to pressure.
If the pressure is doubled, the density is doubled, and if the
pressure is lowered, so is the density. This statement is true
only at a constant temperature.
Effects of Temperature on Density
Increasing the temperature of a substance decreases its
density. Conversely, decreasing the temperature increases
the density. Thus, the density of air varies inversely with
temperature. This statement is true only at a constant pressure.
In the atmosphere, both temperature and pressure decrease
with altitude and have conflicting effects upon density.
However, the fairly rapid drop in pressure as altitude is
increased usually has the dominant effect. Hence, pilots can
expect the density to decrease with altitude.
Effects of Humidity (Moisture) on Density
The preceding paragraphs are based on the presupposition of
perfectly dry air. In reality, it is never completely dry. The
small amount of water vapor suspended in the atmosphere
may be negligible under certain conditions, but in other
conditions humidity may become an important factor in the
performance of an aircraft. Water vapor is lighter than air;
consequently, moist air is lighter than dry air. Therefore, as the
water content of the air increases, the air becomes less dense,
increasing density altitude and decreasing performance. It is
lightest or least dense when, in a given set of conditions, it
contains the maximum amount of water vapor.
Humidity, also called relative humidity, refers to the amount
of water vapor contained in the atmosphere and is expressed
as a percentage of the maximum amount of water vapor
the air can hold. This amount varies with the temperature;
warm air can hold more water vapor, while colder air can
hold less. Perfectly dry air that contains no water vapor has
a relative humidity of zero percent, while saturated air that
cannot hold any more water vapor has a relative humidity
of 100 percent. Humidity alone is usually not considered an
essential factor in calculating density altitude and aircraft
performance; however, it does contribute.
The higher the temperature, the greater amount of water
vapor that the air can hold. When comparing two separate air
masses, the first warm and moist (both qualities making air
lighter) and the second cold and dry (both qualities making
it heavier), the first must be less dense than the second.
Pressure, temperature, and humidity have a great influence
on aircraft performance because of their effect upon density.
There is no rule-of-thumb or chart used to compute the effects
of humidity on density altitude, but it must be taken into
consideration. Expect a decrease in overall performance in
high humidity conditions.
Performance
Performance is a term used to describe the ability of an
aircraft to accomplish certain things that make it useful for
certain purposes. For example, the ability of an aircraft to land
and take off in a very short distance is an important factor
to the pilot who operates in and out of short, unimproved
airfields. The ability to carry heavy loads, fly at high altitudes
at fast speeds, and/or travel long distances is essential for the
performance of airline and executive type aircraft.
The primary factors most affected by performance are the
takeoff and landing distance, rate of climb, ceiling, payload,
range, speed, maneuverability, stability, and fuel economy.
Some of these factors are often directly opposed: for example,
high speed versus short landing distance, long range versus
great payload, and high rate of climb versus fuel economy.
It is the preeminence of one or more of these factors that
dictates differences between aircraft and explains the high
degree of specialization found in modern aircraft.
The various items of aircraft performance result from the
combination of aircraft and powerplant characteristics. The
aerodynamic characteristics of the aircraft generally define
the power and thrust requirements at various conditions of
flight, while powerplant characteristics generally define the
power and thrust available at various conditions of flight.
The matching of the aerodynamic configuration with the
powerplant is accomplished by the manufacturer to provide
maximum performance at the specific design condition (e.g.,
range, endurance, and climb).
Straight-and-Level Flight
All of the principal components of flight performance involve
steady-state flight conditions and equilibrium of the aircraft.
For the aircraft to remain in steady, level flight, equilibrium
must be obtained by a lift equal to the aircraft weight and a
powerplant thrust equal to the aircraft drag. Thus, the aircraft
drag defines the thrust required to maintain steady, level
flight. As presented in Chapter 4, Aerodynamics of Flight,
all parts of an aircraft contribute to the drag, either induced
(from lifting surfaces) or parasite drag.
While parasite drag predominates at high speed, induced drag
predominates at low speed. [Figure 11-5] For example, if
an aircraft in a steady flight condition at 100 knots is then
accelerated to 200 knots, the parasite drag becomes four
times as great, but the power required to overcome that
drag is eight times the original value. Conversely, when the
11-5

energy comes in two forms: (1) Kinetic Energy (KE), the
energy of speed; (2) Potential Energy (PE), the stored energy
Total drag
of position.
Aircraft motion (KE) is described by its velocity (airspeed).
L/DMAX
Drag
Parasite drag
Aircraft position (PE) is described by its height (altitude).
Both KE and PE are directly proportional to the object’s
Stall
mass. KE is directly proportional to the square of the object’s
velocity (airspeed). PE is directly proportional to the object’s
Induced drag
height (altitude). The formulas below summarize these
energy relationships:
Speed
KE = ½ × m × v2
m = object mass
Figure 11-5. Drag versus speed.
v = object velocity
aircraft is operated in steady, level flight at twice as great a
m = object mass
speed, the induced drag is one-fourth the original value, and
PE = m × g × h
g = gravity field strength
the power required to overcome that drag is only one-half
h = object height
the original value.
We sometimes use the terms “power” and “thrust”
When an aircraft is in steady, level flight, the condition of
interchangeably when discussing climb performance. This
equilibrium must prevail. The unaccelerated condition of
erroneously implies the terms are synonymous. It is important
flight is achieved with the aircraft trimmed for lift equal
to distinguish between these terms. Thrust is a force or
to weight and the powerplant set for a thrust to equal the
pressure exerted on an object. Thrust is measured in pounds
aircraft drag.
(lb) or newtons (N). Power, however, is a measurement of
the rate of performing work or transferring energy (KE and
The maximum level flight speed for the aircraft is obtained
PE). Power is typically measured in horsepower (hp) or
when the power or thrust required equals the maximum power
kilowatts (kw). We can think of power as the motion (KE
or thrust available from the powerplant. [Figure 11-6] The
and PE) a force (thrust) creates when exerted on an object
minimum level flight airspeed is not usually defined by thrust
over a period of time.
or power requirement since conditions of stall or stability and
control problems generally predominate.
Positive climb performance occurs when an aircraft gains PE
by increasing altitude. Two basic factors, or a combination
Climb Performance
of the two factors, contribute to positive climb performance
If an aircraft is to move, fly, and perform, work must act
in most aircraft:
upon it. Work involves force moving the aircraft. The aircraft
1. The aircraft climbs (gains PE) using excess power
acquires mechanical energy when it moves. Mechanical
above that required to maintain level flight, or
2. The aircraft climbs by converting airspeed (KE) to
altitude (PE).
va
il
a
m a
bl
Maximu
e
po
wer
As an example of factor 1 above, an aircraft with an engine
High cruise speed
Maximum level flight speed
capable of producing 200 horsepower (at a given altitude)
Power required
is using only 130 horsepower to maintain level flight at that
altitude. This leaves 70 horsepower available to climb. The
Low cruise speed
pilot holds airspeed constant and increases power to perform
Min. speed
the climb.
As an example of factor 2, an aircraft is flying level at 120
knots. The pilot leaves the engine power setting constant but
applies other control inputs to perform a climb. The climb,
Speed
sometimes called a zoom climb, converts the airspeed (KE)
Figure 11-6. Power versus speed.
11-6

to altitude (PE); the airspeed decreases to something less
so as to achieve maximum altitude increase with minimum
than 120 knots as the altitude increases.
horizontal travel over the ground. A good use of maximum
AOC is when taking off from a short airfield surrounded by
There are two primary reasons to evaluate climb performance.
high obstacles, such as trees or power lines. The objective is
First, aircraft must climb over obstacles to avoid hitting
to gain sufficient altitude to clear the obstacle while traveling
them. Second, climbing to higher altitudes can provide
the least horizontal distance over the surface.
better weather, fuel economy, and other benefits. Maximum
Angle of Climb (AOC), obtained at VX, may provide climb
One method to climb (have positive AOC performance) is
performance to ensure an aircraft will clear obstacles.
to have excess thrust available. Essentially, the greater the
Maximum Rate of Climb (ROC), obtained at VY, provides
force that pushes the aircraft upward, the steeper it can climb.
climb performance to achieve the greatest altitude gain over
Maximum AOC occurs at the airspeed and angle of attack
time. Maximum ROC may not be sufficient to avoid obstacles
(AOA) combination which allows the maximum excess
in some situations, while maximum AOC may be sufficient
thrust. The airspeed and AOA combination where excess
to avoid the same obstacles. [Figure 11-7]
thrust exists varies amongst aircraft types. As an example,
Figure 11-8 provides a comparison between jet and propeller
Angle of Climb (AOC)
airplanes as to where maximum excess thrust (for maximum
AOC) occurs. In a jet, maximum excess thrust normally
AOC is a comparison of altitude gained relative to distance
occurs at the airspeed where the thrust required is at a
traveled. AOC is the inclination (angle) of the flight path. For
minimum (approximately L/DMAX). In a propeller airplane,
maximum AOC performance, a pilot flies the aircraft at VX
maximum excess thrust normally occurs at an airspeed below
L/DMAX and frequently just above stall speed.
Rate of Climb (ROC)
ROC is a comparison of altitude gained relative to the time
,
needed to reach that altitude. ROC is simply the vertical
A
-
df
component of the aircraft’s flight path velocity vector. For
|
A
y
Altitude
df
>
fA
maximum ROC performance, a pilot flies the aircraft at VY
so as to achieve a maximum gain in altitude over a given
-
Max ROC
period of time.
Max AOC
Maximum ROC expedites a climb to an assigned altitude.
This gains the greatest vertical distance over a period of
time. For example, in a maximum AOC profile, a certain
Distance
aircraft takes 30 seconds to reach 1,000 feet AGL, but
covers only 3,000 feet over the ground. By comparison,
Figure 11-7. Maximum angle of climb (AOC) versus maximum rate
using its maximum ROC profile, the same aircraft climbs
of climb (ROC).
LEGEND
TE
thrust
excess
(Full PCL)
TA
TA
thrust
TA
(Full Throttle)
available
TR
thrust
TE
required
TE
Thrust
Thrust
TR
AOC
angle of
TR
Max AOC (jet)
climb
TAS
true
airspeed
L/D MAX lift to drag
L/D MAX
L/D MAX
ratio
maximum
Max AOC (prop)
PCL
power
Velocity (TAS)
Velocity (TAS)
control lever
Figure 11-8. Comparison of maximum AOC between jet and propeller airplanes.
11-7

to 1,500 feet in 30 seconds but covers 6,000 feet across the
to minimize the weight, since it has such a marked effect on
ground. Note that both ROC and AOC maximum climb
the factors pertaining to performance.
profiles use the aircraft’s maximum throttle setting. Any
differences between max ROC and max AOC lie primarily
A change in an aircraft’s weight produces a twofold effect
in the velocity (airspeed) and AOA combination the aircraft
on climb performance. First, a change in weight changes the
manual specifies. [Figure 11-7]
drag and the power required. This alters the reserve power
available, which in turn, affects both the climb angle and
ROC performance depends upon excess power. Since
the climb rate. Secondly, an increase in weight reduces the
climbing is work and power is the rate of performing work,
maximum ROC, but the aircraft must be operated at a higher
a pilot can increase the climb rate by using any power not
climb speed to achieve the smaller peak climb rate.
used to maintain level flight. Maximum ROC occurs at an
airspeed and AOA combination that produces the maximum
An increase in altitude also increases the power required
excess power. Therefore, maximum ROC for a typical jet
and decreases the power available. Therefore, the climb
airplane occurs at an airspeed greater than L/DMAX and at an
performance of an aircraft diminishes with altitude. The
AOA less than L/DMAX AOA. In contrast, maximum ROC for
speeds for maximum ROC, maximum AOC, and maximum
a typical propeller airplane occurs at an airspeed and AOA
and minimum level flight airspeeds vary with altitude. As
combination closer to L/DMAX. [Figure 11-9]
altitude is increased, these various speeds finally converge
at the absolute ceiling of the aircraft. At the absolute ceiling,
Climb Performance Factors
there is no excess of power and only one speed allows steady,
level flight. Consequently, the absolute ceiling of an aircraft
Since weight, altitude and configuration changes affect
produces zero ROC. The service ceiling is the altitude at
excess thrust and power, they also affect climb performance.
which the aircraft is unable to climb at a rate greater than 100
Climb performance is directly dependent upon the ability to
feet per minute (fpm). Usually, these specific performance
produce either excess thrust or excess power. Earlier in the
reference points are provided for the aircraft at a specific
book it was shown that an increase in weight, an increase in
design configuration. [Figure 11-10]
altitude, lowering the landing gear, or lowering the flaps all
decrease both excess thrust and excess power for all aircraft.
The terms “power loading,” “wing loading,” “blade loading,”
Therefore, maximum AOC and maximum ROC performance
and “disk loading” are commonly used in reference to
decreases under any of these conditions.
performance. Power loading is expressed in pounds per
horsepower and is obtained by dividing the total weight
Weight has a very pronounced effect on aircraft performance.
of the aircraft by the rated horsepower of the engine. It
If weight is added to an aircraft, it must fly at a higher AOA
is a significant factor in an aircraft’s takeoff and climb
to maintain a given altitude and speed. This increases the
capabilities. Wing loading is expressed in pounds per square
induced drag of the wings, as well as the parasite drag of the
foot and is obtained by dividing the total weight of an airplane
aircraft. Increased drag means that additional thrust is needed
in pounds by the wing area (including ailerons) in square feet.
to overcome it, which in turn means that less reserve thrust is
It is the airplane’s wing loading that determines the landing
available for climbing. Aircraft designers go to great lengths
LEGEND
PE
power
excess
PA
power
available
(Full PCL)
PR
power
(Full Throttle)
PA
required
Power
Power
ROC
rate of
PE
PR
PA
climb
PE
TAS
true
PR
airspeed
L/D MAX lift to drag
ratio
Max ROC (jet)
L/D MAX
maximum
L/D MAX
Max ROC (prop)
PCL
power
Velocity (TAS)
Velocity (TAS)
control lever
Figure 11-9. Comparison of maximum ROC between jet and propeller airplanes.
11-8

A common element for each of these operating problems
is the specific range; that is, nautical miles (NM) of flying
distance versus the amount of fuel consumed. Range must
24,000
be clearly distinguished from the item of endurance. Range
22,000
involves consideration of flying distance, while endurance
20,000
involves consideration of flying time. Thus, it is appropriate
Standard altitude (feet)
Absolute ceiling
18,000
to define a separate term, specific endurance.
Service ceiling
16,000
specific endurance = flight hours
14,000
pounds of fuel
12,000
Best angle
Best rate
10,000
of climb (Vx)
of climb (Vy)
or
8,000
6,000
specific endurance = flight hours/hour
4,000
pounds of fuel/hour
2,000
or
Sea level
Indicated airspeed (knots)
specific endurance = 1
fuel flow
Figure 11-10. Absolute and service ceiling.
Fuel flow can be defined in either pounds or gallons. If
speed. Blade loading is expressed in pounds per square foot
maximum endurance is desired, the flight condition must
and is obtained by dividing the total weight of a helicopter by
provide a minimum fuel flow. In Figure 11-11 at point A,
the area of the rotor blades. Blade loading is not to be confused
the airspeed is low and fuel flow is high. This would occur
with disk loading, which is the total weight of a helicopter
during ground operations or when taking off and climbing.
divided by the area of the disk swept by the rotor blades.
As airspeed is increased, power requirements decrease due
to aerodynamic factors, and fuel flow decreases to point B.
Range Performance
This is the point of maximum endurance. Beyond this point,
The ability of an aircraft to convert fuel energy into flying
increases in airspeed come at a cost. Airspeed increases
distance is one of the most important items of aircraft
require additional power and fuel flow increases with
performance. In flying operations, the problem of efficient
additional power.
range operation of an aircraft appears in two general forms:
1. To extract the maximum flying distance from a given
Cruise flight operations for maximum range should be
fuel load
conducted so that the aircraft obtains maximum specific range
throughout the flight. The specific range can be defined by
2. To fly a specified distance with a minimum
the following relationship.
expenditure of fuel
de
Fuel flow/power required (HP)
ltitu
At a
Reference line
Maximum endurance at
minimum power required
Applicable for a particular
A
Weight
Altitude
B
Configuration
Maximum range at L/DMAX
Speed
Figure 11-11. Airspeed for maximum endurance.
11-9

specific range = NM
pounds of fuel
or
specific range = NM/hour
pounds of fuel/hour
or
specific range = knots
fuel flow
If maximum specific range is desired, the flight condition
must provide a maximum of speed per fuel flow. While
the peak value of specific range would provide maximum
range operation, long-range cruise operation is generally
recommended at a slightly higher airspeed. Most long-range
cruise operations are conducted at the flight condition that
provides 99 percent of the absolute maximum specific range.
The advantage of such operation is that one percent of range
is traded for three to five percent higher cruise speed. Since
the higher cruise speed has a great number of advantages, the
small sacrifice of range is a fair bargain. The values of specific
range versus speed are affected by three principal variables:
1. Aircraft gross weight
2. Altitude
3. The external aerodynamic configuration of the aircraft.
These are the source of range and endurance operating data
included in the performance section of the AFM/POH.
Cruise control of an aircraft implies that the aircraft is
operated to maintain the recommended long-range cruise
condition throughout the flight. Since fuel is consumed during
cruise, the gross weight of the aircraft varies and optimum
airspeed, altitude, and power setting can also vary. Cruise
control means the control of the optimum airspeed, altitude,
and power setting to maintain the 99 percent maximum
specific range condition. At the beginning of cruise flight, the
relatively high initial weight of the aircraft requires specific
values of airspeed, altitude, and power setting to produce the
recommended cruise condition. As fuel is consumed and the
aircraft’s gross weight decreases, the optimum airspeed and
power setting may decrease, or the optimum altitude may
increase. In addition, the optimum specific range increases.
Therefore, the pilot must provide the proper cruise control
procedure to ensure that optimum conditions are maintained.
Total range is dependent on both fuel available and specific
range. When range and economy of operation are the principal
goals, the pilot must ensure that the aircraft is operated at the
11-10
recommended long-range cruise condition. By this procedure,
the aircraft is capable of its maximum design-operating radius
or can achieve flight distances less than the maximum with
a maximum of fuel reserve at the destination.
A propeller-driven aircraft combines the propeller with the
reciprocating engine for propulsive power. Fuel flow is
determined mainly by the shaft power put into the propeller
rather than thrust. Thus, the fuel flow can be related directly
to the power required to maintain the aircraft in steady, level
flight, and on performance charts power can be substituted
for fuel flow. This fact allows for the determination of range
through analysis of power required versus speed.
The maximum endurance condition would be obtained at the
point of minimum power required since this would require the
lowest fuel flow to keep the airplane in steady, level flight.
Maximum range condition would occur where the ratio of
speed to power required is greatest. [Figure 11-11]
The maximum range condition is obtained at maximum lift/
drag ratio (L/DMAX), and it is important to note that for a given
aircraft configuration, the L/DMAX occurs at a particular AOA
and lift coefficient and is unaffected by weight or altitude. A
variation in weight alters the values of airspeed and power
required to obtain the L/DMAX. [Figure 11-12] Different
theories exist on how to achieve max range when there is a
headwind or tailwind present. Many say that speeding up in
a headwind or slowing down in a tail wind helps to achieve
max range. While this theory may be true in a lot of cases,
it is not always true as there are different variables to every
situation. Each aircraft configuration is different, and there
is not a rule of thumb that encompasses all of them as to how
to achieve the max range.
Power required
Figure 11-12. Effect of weight.
ht
weig
L/DMAX
her
eight
Hig
ic w
eight
Bas
er w
Low
Constant altitude
Speed

The variations of speed and power required must be
monitored by the pilot as part of the cruise control procedure
to maintain the L/DMAX. When the aircraft’s fuel weight is a
small part of the gross weight and the aircraft’s range is small,
the cruise control procedure can be simplified to essentially
maintaining a constant speed and power setting throughout
the time of cruise flight. However, a long-range aircraft has a
fuel weight that is a considerable part of the gross weight, and
cruise control procedures must employ scheduled airspeed
and power changes to maintain optimum range conditions.
The effect of altitude on the range of a propeller-driven
aircraft is illustrated in Figure 11-13. A flight conducted at
high altitude has a greater true airspeed (TAS), and the power
required is proportionately greater than when conducted at
sea level. The drag of the aircraft at altitude is the same as the
drag at sea level, but the higher TAS causes a proportionately
greater power required.
NOTE: The straight line that is tangent to the sea level power
curve is also tangent to the altitude power curve.
The effect of altitude on specific range can also be appreciated
from the previous relationships. If a change in altitude causes
identical changes in speed and power required, the proportion
of speed to power required would be unchanged. The fact
implies that the specific range of a propeller-driven aircraft
would be unaffected by altitude. Actually, this is true to the
extent that specific fuel consumption and propeller efficiency
are the principal factors that could cause a variation of
specific range with altitude. If compressibility effects are
negligible, any variation of specific range with altitude is
strictly a function of engine/propeller performance.
An aircraft equipped with a reciprocating engine experiences
very little, if any, variation of specific range up to its
absolute altitude. There is negligible variation of brake
Power required
Figure 11-13. Effect of altitude on range.
specific fuel consumption for values of brake horsepower
below the maximum cruise power rating of the engine that
is the lean range of engine operation. Thus, an increase in
altitude produces a decrease in specific range only when the
increased power requirement exceeds the maximum cruise
power rating of the engine. One advantage of supercharging
is that the cruise power may be maintained at high altitude,
and the aircraft may achieve the range at high altitude with
the corresponding increase in TAS. The principal differences
in the high altitude cruise and low altitude cruise are the TAS
and climb fuel requirements.
Region of Reversed Command
The aerodynamic properties of an aircraft generally determine
the power requirements at various conditions of flight, while
the powerplant capabilities generally determine the power
available at various conditions of flight. When an aircraft
is in steady, level flight, a condition of equilibrium must
prevail. An unaccelerated condition of flight is achieved
when lift equals weight, and the powerplant is set for thrust
equal to drag. The power required to achieve equilibrium in
constant-altitude flight at various airspeeds is depicted on a
power required curve. The power required curve illustrates
the fact that at low airspeeds near the stall or minimum
controllable airspeed, the power setting required for steady,
level flight is quite high.
Flight in the region of normal command means that while
holding a constant altitude, a higher airspeed requires a higher
power setting and a lower airspeed requires a lower power
setting. The majority of aircraft flying (climb, cruise, and
maneuvers) is conducted in the region of normal command.
Flight in the region of reversed command means flight in
which a higher airspeed requires a lower power setting
and a lower airspeed requires a higher power setting to
hold altitude. It does not imply that a decrease in power
produces lower airspeed. The region of reversed command is
encountered in the low speed phases of flight. Flight speeds
below the speed for maximum endurance (lowest point
de
on the power curve) require higher power settings with a
ltitu
l
leve
At a
decrease in airspeed. Since the need to increase the required
Sea
power setting with decreased speed is contrary to the normal
command of flight, the regime of flight speeds between the
speed for minimum required power setting and the stall speed
(or minimum control speed) is termed the region of reversed
command. In the region of reversed command, a decrease in
airspeed must be accompanied by an increased power setting
Constant weight
in order to maintain steady flight.
L/DMAX
Figure 11-14 shows the maximum power available as a
Speed
curved line. Lower power settings, such as cruise power,
would also appear in a similar curve. The lowest point on
11-11

Takeoff and landing performance is a condition of
accelerated and decelerated motion. For instance, during
takeoff an aircraft starts at zero speed and accelerates to
Ma
xim
um
powe
r avail
the takeoff speed to become airborne. During landing, the
able
aircraft touches down at the landing speed and decelerates
Region of
Power setting
d
to zero speed. The important factors of takeoff or landing
quire
Excess power
reversed
command
performance are:
er re
Pow
•
The takeoff or landing speed is generally a function
of the stall speed or minimum flying speed.
•
The rate of acceleration/deceleration during the
takeoff or landing roll. The speed (acceleration and
Best endurance speed
deceleration) experienced by any object varies directly
with the imbalance of force and inversely with the
Speed
mass of the object. An airplane on the runway moving
at 75 knots has four times the energy it has traveling
Figure 11-14. Power required curve.
at 37 knots. Thus, an airplane requires four times as
much distance to stop as required at half the speed.
the power required curve represents the speed at which the
•
The takeoff or landing roll distance is a function of
lowest brake horsepower sustains level flight. This is termed
both acceleration/deceleration and speed.
the best endurance airspeed.
Runway Surface and Gradient
An airplane performing a low airspeed, high pitch attitude
Runway conditions affect takeoff and landing performance.
power approach for a short-field landing is an example
Typically, performance chart information assumes paved,
of operating in the region of reversed command. If an
level, smooth, and dry runway surfaces. Since no two
unacceptably high sink rate should develop, it may be
runways are alike, the runway surface differs from one
possible for the pilot to reduce or stop the descent by applying
runway to another, as does the runway gradient or slope.
power. But without further use of power, the airplane would
[Figure 11-15]
probably stall or be incapable of flaring for the landing.
Merely lowering the nose of the airplane to regain flying
Runway surfaces vary widely from one airport to another.
speed in this situation, without the use of power, would
The runway surface encountered may be concrete, asphalt,
result in a rapid sink rate and corresponding loss of altitude.
gravel, dirt, or grass. The runway surface for a specific
airport is noted in the Chart Supplement U.S. (formerly
If during a soft-field takeoff and climb, for example, the pilot
Airport/Facility Directory). Any surface that is not hard
attempts to climb out of ground effect without first attaining
and smooth increases the ground roll during takeoff. This
normal climb pitch attitude and airspeed, the airplane may
is due to the inability of the tires to roll smoothly along the
inadvertently enter the region of reversed command at a
runway. Tires can sink into soft, grassy, or muddy runways.
dangerously low altitude. Even with full power, the airplane
Potholes or other ruts in the pavement can be the cause of
may be incapable of climbing or even maintaining altitude.
poor tire movement along the runway. Obstructions such
The pilot’s only recourse in this situation is to lower the pitch
as mud, snow, or standing water reduce the airplane’s
attitude in order to increase airspeed, which inevitably results
acceleration down the runway. Although muddy and wet
in a loss of altitude.
surface conditions can reduce friction between the runway
and the tires, they can also act as obstructions and reduce
Airplane pilots must give particular attention to precise
the landing distance. [Figure 11-16] Braking effectiveness
control of airspeed when operating in the low flight speeds
is another consideration when dealing with various runway
of the region of reversed command.
types. The condition of the surface affects the braking ability
Takeoff and Landing Performance
of the aircraft.
The majority of pilot-caused aircraft accidents occur during
The amount of power that is applied to the brakes without
the takeoff and landing phase of flight. Because of this fact,
skidding the tires is referred to as braking effectiveness.
the pilot must be familiar with all the variables that influence
Ensure that runways are adequate in length for takeoff
the takeoff and landing performance of an aircraft and must
acceleration and landing deceleration when less than ideal
strive for exacting, professional procedures of operation
surface conditions are being reported.
during these phases of flight.
11-12

TAKEOFF DISTANCE
MAXIMUM WEIGHT 3800 LBS
éonDiTiONe:
SHORT FIELD
2850 RPM, Full Throttle and Mixture Set at Placard Fuel Flow Prior to Brake Release
Cow! Flaps Open
S.L.
Paved, Level, Dry Runway
Zero Wind
NOTES:
1.
Short field technique as specified in Section 4.
2.
Landing gear extended until takeoff obstacle is cleared.
3.
Where distance value has been deleted, climb performance after lift-off is less than 150 fpm.
Rate of climb
is based on
landing gear extended and flaps 10° at takeoff speed.
4,
Decrease distances 10% for each 10 knots headwind.
For operation with tailwinds up to 10 knots, increase distances
by 10% for each 2.5 knots.
5.
For operation on a dry, grass runway, increase distances by 15% of the “ground roll” figure.
WweicHt|
SPEED
|PREss
LBS
KIAS | ALT
TOTAL
TOTAL
TOTAL
TOTAL
TOTAL
Lift]
AT]
FT
|GRND|TO CLEAR|GRND|TO CLEAR|GRND|TO CLEAR|GRND|TO CLEAR|GRND|TO CLEAR
ae he
ROLL Inner arclany:
leneTorstroit
leneTorS ROL! ISOFTORS IROL! ISQ
ET ORS
Figure 11-15. Takeoff distance chart.
Water on the Runway and Dynamic Hydroplaning
The gradient or slope of the runway is the amount of change
in runway height over the length of the runway. The gradient
Water on the runways reduces the friction between the tires
is expressed as a percentage, such as a 3 percent gradient. This
and the ground and can reduce braking effectiveness. The
means that for every 100 feet of runway length, the runway
ability to brake can be completely lost when the tires are
height changes by 3 feet. A positive gradient indicates the
hydroplaning because a layer of water separates the tires from
runway height increases, and a negative gradient indicates the
the runway surface. This is also true of braking effectiveness
runway decreases in height. An upsloping runway impedes
when runways are covered in ice.
acceleration and results in a longer ground run during takeoff.
However, landing on an upsloping runway typically reduces
When the runway is wet, the pilot may be confronted with
the landing roll. A downsloping runway aids in acceleration
dynamic hydroplaning. Dynamic hydroplaning is a condition
on takeoff resulting in shorter takeoff distances. The opposite
in which the aircraft tires ride on a thin sheet of water rather
is true when landing, as landing on a downsloping runway
than on the runway’s surface. Because hydroplaning wheels
increases landing distances. Runway slope information is
are not touching the runway, braking and directional control
contained in the Chart Supplement U.S. (formerly Airport/
are almost nil. To help minimize dynamic hydroplaning,
Facility Directory). [Figure 11-17]
some runways are grooved to help drain off water; most
runways are not.
PEK
Na
ee
(a
fer ED
i€'
Soa Sy
Figure 11-16. An aircraft’s performance during takeoff depends greatly on the runway surface.
11-13

Runway surface
COLORADO
Airport name
Runway slope and direction of slope
JEFFCO
(Bc)
9NW
UTC-7(-6DT)
N39°54.53' W105°07.03'
DENVER
B
S4
FUEL
100LL,JETA
0X1,2,3,4
H-2D, L-6E, 86,
A
RWY 11L-29R: H9000X100 (ASPH-GRVD)
S-55,D-75
MIRL
JAP, AD
Runway
RWY 28R: MALSR. VASI(V4L}—GA 3.0° TCH 45". Ret tfc. 1.2% up.
an yen
RWY TIL: REIL. VASI(V4L)—GA 3.0° TCH 42’.
1.0% down
liuhoudul
_| Helipad HI: 50 x 50
RWY 11R-29L: H7004X75 (ASPH)
S-12.5
MIRL
1.1% up NW
|
RWY 11R: REIL. PAPI(P2L)—GA 3.0° TCH 41’. Ret tfc.
*
RWY 291: REIL. PAPI(P2L)—GA 3.0° TCH 40'.
|
s
-
RWY 02-20: H3601X75 (ASPH)
S-40, D-45, DT-65_
—-MIRL
|
Ftv. '
“ae
-
—_
0.5% up
sxe@e.
oy
‘Ofer
RWY 02: PAPI(P2L)—GA 3.0° TCH 30’.
RRR ee
(
RWY 20: PAPI(P2L)—GA 3.0° TCH 40’, Ret tfc.
| ~ 7S
SA ae
|
AIRPORT REMARKS: Attended continuously. Birds on and in vicinity of
|
DY
a
|
arpt. Watch for deer on or near rwys. Half inch depression in Rwy
|
oe
“ oS Nee
|
14R-291 full width by 10’ length at approximately 2550’ from
=
PLP Na
east end, One inch depression in Rwy 11R-29L full width by 10°
~™
@ es
Jength at approximately 3650 from east end. Construction
Pe
requested to avoid flight over Stanley Lake blo 8000' MSL. Jeffco
|
& ca
equipment/cranes on and invof arpt at various times. Pilots are
|
Figure 11-17. Chart Supplement U.S. (formerly Airport/Facility Directory) information.
Tire pressure is a factor in dynamic hydroplaning. Using
well before landing and be prepared for hydroplaning. Opt for
the simple formula in Figure 11-18, a pilot can calculate
a suitable runway most aligned with the wind. Mechanical
the minimum speed, in knots, at which hydroplaning begins.
braking may be ineffective, so aerodynamic braking should
In plain language, the minimum hydroplaning speed is
be used to its fullest advantage.
determined by multiplying the square root of the main gear
Takeoff Performance
tire pressure in psi by nine. For example, if the main gear tire
pressure is at 36 psi, the aircraft would begin hydroplaning
The minimum takeoff distance is of primary interest in
at 54 knots.
the operation of any aircraft because it defines the runway
requirements. The minimum takeoff distance is obtained by
Landing at higher than recommended touchdown speeds
taking off at some minimum safe speed that allows sufficient
exposes the aircraft to a greater potential for hydroplaning.
margin above stall and provides satisfactory control and
And once hydroplaning starts, it can continue well below the
initial ROC. Generally, the lift-off speed is some fixed
minimum initial hydroplaning speed.
percentage of the stall speed or minimum control speed for
the aircraft in the takeoff configuration. As such, the lift-off is
On wet runways, directional control can be maximized
accomplished at some particular value of lift coefficient and
by landing into the wind. Abrupt control inputs should be
AOA. Depending on the aircraft characteristics, the lift-off
4Y
avoided. When the runway is wet, anticipate braking problems
speed is anywhere from 1.05 to 1.25 times the stall speed or
minimum control speed.
Minimum dynamic hydroplaning speed (rounded off) =
To obtain minimum takeoff distance at the specific lift-off
speed, the forces that act on the aircraft must provide the
maximum acceleration during the takeoff roll. The various
forces acting on the aircraft may or may not be under the
control of the pilot, and various procedures may be necessary
9 x Tire pressure (in psi)
in certain aircraft to maintain takeoff acceleration at the
highest value.
The powerplant thrust is the principal force to provide the
sh
acceleration and, for minimum takeoff distance, the output
thrust should be at a maximum. Lift and drag are produced
36 = 6
as soon as the aircraft has speed, and the values of lift and
9 x 6 = 54 knots
drag depend on the AOA and dynamic pressure.
Figure 11-18. Tire pressure.
11-14

As discussed in Chapter 6, engine pressure ratio (EPR) is the
ratio between exhaust pressure (jet blast) and inlet (static)
pressure on a turbo jet or turbo fan engine. An EPR gauge
tells the pilot how much power the engines are generating.
The higher the EPR, the higher the engine thrust. EPR is
used to avoid over-boosting an engine and to set takeoff and
go around power if needed. This information is important to
know before taking off as it helps determine the performance
of the aircraft.
In addition to the important factors of proper procedures,
many other variables affect the takeoff performance of an
aircraft. Any item that alters the takeoff speed or acceleration
rate during the takeoff roll affects the takeoff distance.
For example, the effect of gross weight on takeoff distance
is significant, and proper consideration of this item must be
made in predicting the aircraft’s takeoff distance. Increased
gross weight can be considered to produce a threefold effect
on takeoff performance:
1. Higher lift-off speed
2. Greater mass to accelerate
3. Increased retarding force (drag and ground friction)
If the gross weight increases, a greater speed is necessary to
produce the greater lift necessary to get the aircraft airborne
at the takeoff lift coefficient. As an example of the effect of
a change in gross weight, a 21 percent increase in takeoff
weight requires a 10 percent increase in lift-off speed to
support the greater weight.
A change in gross weight changes the net accelerating force
and changes the mass that is being accelerated. If the aircraft
has a relatively high thrust-to-weight ratio, the change in the
net accelerating force is slight and the principal effect on
acceleration is due to the change in mass.
For example, a 10 percent increase in takeoff gross weight
would cause:
•
A 5 percent increase in takeoff velocity
•
At least a 9 percent decrease in rate of acceleration
•
At least a 21 percent increase in takeoff distance
With ISA conditions, increasing the takeoff weight of the
average Cessna 182 from 2,400 pounds to 2,700 pounds (11
percent increase) results in an increased takeoff distance from
440 feet to 575 feet (23 percent increase).
For the aircraft with a high thrust-to-weight ratio, the increase
in takeoff distance might be approximately 21 to 22 percent,
but for the aircraft with a relatively low thrust-to-weight
ratio, the increase in takeoff distance would be approximately
25 to 30 percent. Such a powerful effect requires proper
consideration of gross weight in predicting takeoff distance.
The effect of wind on takeoff distance is large, and proper
consideration must also be provided when predicting takeoff
distance. The effect of a headwind is to allow the aircraft to
reach the lift-off speed at a lower groundspeed, while the
effect of a tailwind is to require the aircraft to achieve a
greater groundspeed to attain the lift-off speed.
A headwind that is 10 percent of the takeoff airspeed reduces
the takeoff distance approximately 19 percent. However, a
tailwind that is 10 percent of the takeoff airspeed increases
the takeoff distance approximately 21 percent. In the case
where the headwind speed is 50 percent of the takeoff speed,
the takeoff distance would be approximately 25 percent of
the zero wind takeoff distance (75 percent reduction).
The effect of wind on landing distance is identical to its
effect on takeoff distance. Figure 11-19 illustrates the general
effect of wind by the percent change in takeoff or landing
distance as a function of the ratio of wind velocity to takeoff
or landing speed.
The effect of proper takeoff speed is especially important
when runway lengths and takeoff distances are critical. The
takeoff speeds specified in the AFM/POH are generally
the minimum safe speeds at which the aircraft can become
airborne. Any attempt to take off below the recommended
speed means that the aircraft could stall, be difficult to
control, or have a very low initial ROC. In some cases, an
Reference line
Percent increase
in takeoff or
landing distance
Ratio of wind
velocity to takeoff
or landing speed
Tailwind
30%
20%
10%
10%
20% 30%
Headwind
Ratio of wind
velocity to takeoff
or landing speed
Percent decrease
in takeoff or
landing distance
Figure 11-19. Effect of wind on takeoff and landing.
11-15

excessive AOA may not allow the aircraft to climb out of
ground effect. On the other hand, an excessive airspeed at
takeoff may improve the initial ROC and “feel” of the aircraft
but produces an undesirable increase in takeoff distance.
Assuming that the acceleration is essentially unaffected, the
takeoff distance varies with the square of the takeoff velocity.
Thus, ten percent excess airspeed would increase the takeoff
distance 21 percent. In most critical takeoff conditions, such
an increase in takeoff distance would be prohibitive, and the
pilot must adhere to the recommended takeoff speeds.
The effect of pressure altitude and ambient temperature
is to define the density altitude and its effect on takeoff
performance. While subsequent corrections are appropriate
for the effect of temperature on certain items of powerplant
performance, density altitude defines specific effects on
takeoff performance. An increase in density altitude can
produce a twofold effect on takeoff performance:
1. Greater takeoff speed
2. Decreased thrust and reduced net accelerating force
If an aircraft of given weight and configuration is operated at
greater heights above standard sea level, the aircraft requires
the same dynamic pressure to become airborne at the takeoff
lift coefficient. Thus, the aircraft at altitude takes off at the
same indicated airspeed (IAS) as at sea level, but because of
the reduced air density, the TAS is greater.
The effect of density altitude on powerplant thrust depends
much on the type of powerplant. An increase in altitude
above standard sea level brings an immediate decrease in
power output for the unsupercharged reciprocating engine.
However, an increase in altitude above standard sea level does
not cause a decrease in power output for the supercharged
reciprocating engine until the altitude exceeds the critical
operating altitude. For those powerplants that experience
a decay in thrust with an increase in altitude, the effect
on the net accelerating force and acceleration rate can be
approximated by assuming a direct variation with density.
Actually, this assumed variation would closely approximate
the effect on aircraft with high thrust-to-weight ratios.
Proper accounting of pressure altitude and temperature is
mandatory for accurate prediction of takeoff roll distance.
The most critical conditions of takeoff performance are the
result of some combination of high gross weight, altitude,
temperature, and unfavorable wind. In all cases, the pilot
must make an accurate prediction of takeoff distance from
the performance data of the AFM/POH, regardless of the
runway available, and strive for a polished, professional
takeoff procedure.
11-16
In the prediction of takeoff distance from the AFM/POH
data, the following primary considerations must be given:
•
Pressure altitude and temperature—to define the effect
of density altitude on distance
•
Gross weight—a large effect on distance
•
Wind—a large effect due to the wind or wind
component along the runway
•
Runway slope and condition—the effect of an incline
and retarding effect of factors such as snow or ice
Landing Performance
In many cases, the landing distance of an aircraft defines the
runway requirements for flight operations. The minimum
landing distance is obtained by landing at some minimum safe
speed, that allows sufficient margin above stall and provides
satisfactory control and capability for a go-around. Generally,
the landing speed is some fixed percentage of the stall speed
or minimum control speed for the aircraft in the landing
configuration. As such, the landing is accomplished at some
particular value of lift coefficient and AOA. The exact values
depend on the aircraft characteristics but, once defined, the
values are independent of weight, altitude, and wind.
To obtain minimum landing distance at the specified landing
speed, the forces that act on the aircraft must provide
maximum deceleration during the landing roll. The forces
acting on the aircraft during the landing roll may require
various procedures to maintain landing deceleration at the
peak value.
A distinction should be made between the procedures for
minimum landing distance and an ordinary landing roll
with considerable excess runway available. Minimum
landing distance is obtained by creating a continuous peak
deceleration of the aircraft; that is, extensive use of the brakes
for maximum deceleration. On the other hand, an ordinary
landing roll with considerable excess runway may allow
extensive use of aerodynamic drag to minimize wear and tear
on the tires and brakes. If aerodynamic drag is sufficient to
cause deceleration, it can be used in deference to the brakes
in the early stages of the landing roll (i.e., brakes and tires
suffer from continuous hard use, but aircraft aerodynamic
drag is free and does not wear out with use). The use of
aerodynamic drag is applicable only for deceleration to 60
or 70 percent of the touchdown speed. At speeds less than
60 to 70 percent of the touchdown speed, aerodynamic drag
is so slight as to be of little use, and braking must be utilized
to produce continued deceleration. Since the objective during
the landing roll is to decelerate, the powerplant thrust should
be the smallest possible positive value (or largest possible
negative value in the case of thrust reversers).

In addition to the important factors of proper procedures,
many other variables affect the landing performance. Any
item that alters the landing speed or deceleration rate during
the landing roll affects the landing distance.
The effect of gross weight on landing distance is one of the
principal items determining the landing distance. One effect
of an increased gross weight is that a greater speed is required
to support the aircraft at the landing AOA and lift coefficient.
For an example of the effect of a change in gross weight, a
21 percent increase in landing weight requires a ten percent
increase in landing speed to support the greater weight.
When minimum landing distances are considered, braking
friction forces predominate during the landing roll and, for
the majority of aircraft configurations, braking friction is the
main source of deceleration.
The minimum landing distance varies in direct proportion
to the gross weight. For example, a ten percent increase in
gross weight at landing would cause a:
•
Five percent increase in landing velocity
•
Ten percent increase in landing distance
A contingency of this is the relationship between weight and
braking friction force.
The effect of wind on landing distance is large and deserves
proper consideration when predicting landing distance. Since
the aircraft lands at a particular airspeed independent of the
wind, the principal effect of wind on landing distance is
the change in the groundspeed at which the aircraft touches
down. The effect of wind on deceleration during the landing
is identical to the effect on acceleration during the takeoff.
The effect of pressure altitude and ambient temperature is to
define density altitude and its effect on landing performance.
An increase in density altitude increases the landing speed
but does not alter the net retarding force. Thus, the aircraft
at altitude lands at the same IAS as at sea level but, because
of the reduced density, the TAS is greater. Since the aircraft
lands at altitude with the same weight and dynamic pressure,
the drag and braking friction throughout the landing roll have
the same values as at sea level. As long as the condition is
within the capability of the brakes, the net retarding force
is unchanged, and the deceleration is the same as with the
landing at sea level. Since an increase in altitude does not
alter deceleration, the effect of density altitude on landing
distance is due to the greater TAS.
The minimum landing distance at 5,000 feet is 16 percent
greater than the minimum landing distance at sea level. The
approximate increase in landing distance with altitude is
approximately three and one-half percent for each 1,000 feet
of altitude. Proper accounting of density altitude is necessary
to accurately predict landing distance.
The effect of proper landing speed is important when runway
lengths and landing distances are critical. The landing speeds
specified in the AFM/POH are generally the minimum safe
speeds at which the aircraft can be landed. Any attempt to
land at below the specified speed may mean that the aircraft
may stall, be difficult to control, or develop high rates of
descent. On the other hand, an excessive speed at landing may
improve the controllability slightly (especially in crosswinds)
but causes an undesirable increase in landing distance.
A ten percent excess landing speed causes at least a 21
percent increase in landing distance. The excess speed
places a greater working load on the brakes because of the
additional kinetic energy to be dissipated. Also, the additional
speed causes increased drag and lift in the normal ground
attitude, and the increased lift reduces the normal force on
the braking surfaces. The deceleration during this range of
speed immediately after touchdown may suffer, and it is more
probable for a tire to be blown out from braking at this point.
The most critical conditions of landing performance are
combinations of high gross weight, high density altitude,
and unfavorable wind. These conditions produce the greatest
required landing distances and critical levels of energy
dissipation on the brakes. In all cases, it is necessary to
make an accurate prediction of minimum landing distance to
compare with the available runway. A polished, professional
landing procedure is necessary because the landing phase of
flight accounts for more pilot-caused aircraft accidents than
any other single phase of flight.
In the prediction of minimum landing distance from the
AFM/POH data, the following considerations must be given:
•
Pressure altitude and temperature—to define the effect
of density altitude
•
Gross weight—which defines the CAS for landing
•
Wind—a large effect due to wind or wind component
along the runway
•
Runway slope and condition—relatively small
correction for ordinary values of runway slope, but a
significant effect of snow, ice, or soft ground
A tail wind of ten knots increases the landing distance by
about 21 percent. An increase of landing speed by ten percent
increases the landing distance by 20 percent. Hydroplaning
makes braking ineffective until a decrease of speed that can
be determined by using Figure 11-18.
11-17

For instance, a pilot is downwind for runway 18, and the
tower asks if runway 27 could be accepted. There is a light
rain and the winds are out of the east at ten knots. The pilot
accepts because he or she is approaching the extended
centerline of runway 27. The turn is tight and the pilot must
descend (dive) to get to runway 27. After becoming aligned
with the runway and at 50 feet AGL, the pilot is already 1,000
feet down the 3,500 feet runway. The airspeed is still high
by about ten percent (should be at 70 knots and is at about
80 knots). The wind of ten knots is blowing from behind.
First, the airspeed being high by about ten percent (80 knots
versus 70 knots), as presented in the performance chapter,
results in a 20 percent increase in the landing distance.
In performance planning, the pilot determined that at 70
knots the distance would be 1,600 feet. However, now it
is increased by 20 percent and the required distance is now
1,920 feet.
The newly revised landing distance of 1,920 feet is also
affected by the wind. In looking at Figure 11-19, the affect
of the wind is an additional 20 percent for every ten miles
per hour (mph) in wind. This is computed not on the original
estimate but on the estimate based upon the increased
airspeed. Now the landing distance is increased by another
320 feet for a total requirement of 2,240 feet to land the
airplane after reaching 50 feet AGL.
That is the original estimate of 1,600 under planned conditions
plus the additional 640 feet for excess speed and the tailwind.
Given the pilot overshot the threshhold by 1,000 feet, the
total length required is 3,240 on a 3,500 foot runway; 260
feet to spare. But this is in a perfect environment. Most pilots
become fearful as the end of the runway is facing them just
ahead. A typical pilot reaction is to brake—and brake hard.
Because the aircraft does not have antilock braking features
like a car, the brakes lock, and the aircraft hydroplanes on
the wet surface of the runway until decreasing to a speed of
about 54 knots (the square root of the tire pressure (√36) ×
9). Braking is ineffective when hydroplaning.
The 260 feet that a pilot might feel is left over has long since
evaporated as the aircraft hydroplaned the first 300–500 feet
when the brakes locked. This is an example of a true story,
but one which only changes from year to year because of new
participants and aircraft with different N-numbers.
In this example, the pilot actually made many bad decisions.
Bad decisions, when combined, have a synergy greater
than the individual errors. Therefore, the corrective
actions become larger and larger until correction is almost
impossible. Aeronautical decision-making is discussed more
fully in Chapter 2, Aeronautical Decision-Making (ADM).
11-18
Performance Speeds
True airspeed (TAS)—the speed of the aircraft in relation to
the air mass in which it is flying.
Indicated airspeed (IAS)—the speed of the aircraft as
observed on the ASI. It is the airspeed without correction for
indicator, position (or installation), or compressibility errors.
Calibrated airspeed (CAS)—the ASI reading corrected for
position (or installation) and instrument errors. (CAS is
equal to TAS at sea level in standard atmosphere.) The color
coding for various design speeds marked on ASIs may be
IAS or CAS.
Equivalent airspeed (EAS)—the ASI reading corrected
for position (or installation), for instrument error, and for
adiabatic compressible flow for the particular altitude. (EAS
is equal to CAS at sea level in standard atmosphere.)
VS0—the calibrated power-off stalling speed or the minimum
steady flight speed at which the aircraft is controllable in the
landing configuration.
VS1—the calibrated power-off stalling speed or the minimum
steady flight speed at which the aircraft is controllable in a
specified configuration.
VY—the speed at which the aircraft obtains the maximum
increase in altitude per unit of time. This best ROC speed
normally decreases slightly with altitude.
VX—the speed at which the aircraft obtains the highest
altitude in a given horizontal distance. This best AOC speed
normally increases slightly with altitude.
VLE—the maximum speed at which the aircraft can be safely
flown with the landing gear extended. This is a problem
involving stability and controllability.
VLO—the maximum speed at which the landing gear can
be safely extended or retracted. This is a problem involving
the air loads imposed on the operating mechanism during
extension or retraction of the gear.
VFE—the highest speed permissible with the wing flaps in a
prescribed extended position. This is because of the air loads
imposed on the structure of the flaps.
VA—the calibrated design maneuvering airspeed. This is
the maximum speed at which the limit load can be imposed
(either by gusts or full deflection of the control surfaces)
without causing structural damage. Operating at or below

maneuvering speed does not provide structural protection
against multiple full control inputs in one axis or full control
inputs in more than one axis at the same time.
VN0—the maximum speed for normal operation or the
maximum structural cruising speed. This is the speed at
which exceeding the limit load factor may cause permanent
deformation of the aircraft structure.
VNE—the speed that should never be exceeded. If flight is
attempted above this speed, structural damage or structural
failure may result.
Performance Charts
Performance charts allow a pilot to predict the takeoff, climb,
cruise, and landing performance of an aircraft. These charts,
provided by the manufacturer, are included in the AFM/POH.
Information the manufacturer provides on these charts has
been gathered from test flights conducted in a new aircraft,
under normal operating conditions while using average
piloting skills, and with the aircraft and engine in good
working order. Engineers record the flight data and create
performance charts based on the behavior of the aircraft
during the test flights. By using these performance charts,
a pilot can determine the runway length needed to take off
and land, the amount of fuel to be used during flight, and the
time required to arrive at the destination. It is important to
remember that the data from the charts will not be accurate
if the aircraft is not in good working order or when operating
under adverse conditions. Always consider the necessity to
compensate for the performance numbers if the aircraft is not
in good working order or piloting skills are below average.
Figure 11-20. Conditions notes chart.
Each aircraft performs differently and, therefore, has different
performance numbers. Compute the performance of the
aircraft prior to every flight, as every flight is different. (See
appendix for examples of performance charts for a Cessna
Model 172R and Challenger 605.)
Every chart is based on certain conditions and contains
notes on how to adapt the information for flight conditions.
It is important to read every chart and understand how to
use it. Read the instructions provided by the manufacturer.
For an explanation on how to use the charts, refer to the
example provided by the manufacturer for that specific chart.
[Figure 11-20]
The information manufacturers furnish is not standardized.
Information may be contained in a table format and
other information may be contained in a graph format.
Sometimes combined graphs incorporate two or more graphs
into one chart to compensate for multiple conditions of
flight. Combined graphs allow the pilot to predict aircraft
performance for variations in density altitude, weight,
and winds all on one chart. Because of the vast amount of
information that can be extracted from this type of chart, it
is important to be very accurate in reading the chart. A small
error in the beginning can lead to a large error at the end.
The remainder of this section covers performance information
for aircraft in general and discusses what information the
charts contain and how to extract information from the charts
by direct reading and interpolation methods. Every chart
contains a wealth of information that should be used when
flight planning. Examples of the table, graph, and combined
graph formats for all aspects of flight are discussed.
,
,
,
11-19

Interpolation
and read the approximate density altitude. The approximate
density altitude in thousands of feet is 7,700 feet.
Not all of the information on the charts is easily extracted.
Some charts require interpolation to find the information for
Takeoff Charts
specific flight conditions. Interpolating information means
Takeoff charts are typically provided in several forms and
that by taking the known information, a pilot can compute
allow a pilot to compute the takeoff distance of the aircraft
intermediate information. However, pilots sometimes round
with no flaps or with a specific flap configuration. A pilot can
off values from charts to a more conservative figure.
also compute distances for a no flap takeoff over a 50 foot
obstacle scenario, as well as with flaps over a 50 foot obstacle.
Using values that reflect slightly more adverse conditions
The takeoff distance chart provides for various aircraft
provides a reasonable estimate of performance information
weights, altitudes, temperatures, winds, and obstacle heights.
and gives a slight margin of safety. The following illustration
is an example of interpolating information from a takeoff
Sample Problem 2
distance chart. [Figure 11-21]
Pressure Altitude...............................................2,000 feet
Density Altitude Charts
OAT..........................................................................22 °C
Use a density altitude chart to figure the density altitude at the
Takeoff Weight.............................................2,600 pounds
departing airport. Using Figure 11-22, determine the density
altitude based on the given information.
Headwind...............................................................6 knots
Obstacle Height.......................................50 foot obstacle
Sample Problem 1
Airport Elevation...............................................5,883 feet
Refer to Figure 11-23. This chart is an example of a combined
takeoff distance graph. It takes into consideration pressure
OAT...........................................................................70 °F
altitude, temperature, weight, wind, and obstacles all on one
Altimeter...........................................................30.10 "Hg
chart. First, find the correct temperature on the bottom left
side of the graph. Follow the line from 22 °C straight up until
First, compute the pressure altitude conversion. Find 30.10
it intersects the 2,000 foot altitude line. From that point, draw
under the altimeter heading. Read across to the second
a line straight across to the first dark reference line. Continue
column. It reads “–165.” Therefore, it is necessary to subtract
to draw the line from the reference point in a diagonal
165 from the airport elevation giving a pressure altitude of
direction following the surrounding lines until it intersects
5,718 feet. Next, locate the outside air temperature on the
the corresponding weight line. From the intersection of 2,600
scale along the bottom of the graph. From 70°, draw a line up
pounds, draw a line straight across until it reaches the second
to the 5,718 feet pressure altitude line, which is about two-
reference line. Once again, follow the lines in a diagonal
thirds of the way up between the 5,000 and 6,000 foot lines.
manner until it reaches the six knot headwind mark. Follow
Draw a line straight across to the far left side of the graph
TAKEOFF DISTANCE
Flaps 10°
Conditions
Full throttle prior to brake release
MAXIMUM WEIGHT 2,400 LB
Paved level runway
Zero wind
Takeoff
0 °C
10 °C
20 °C
30 °C
40 °C
speed KIAS
Press
Weight
Total feet
Total feet
Total feet
Grnd
Total feet
Grnd
Total feet
ALT
Grnd
Grnd
Grnd
(lb)
Lift
AT
to clear
to clear
to clear
roll
to clear
roll
to clear
(ft)
roll
roll
roll
off
50 ft
50 ft OBS
50 ft OBS
50 ft OBS
(ft)
50 ft OBS
(ft)
50 ft OBS
(ft)
(ft)
(ft)
2,400
1,065
1,460
1,570
1,685
1,810
1,945
S.L.
1,170
1,605
1,725
1,015
1,860
2,000
2,155
1,000
1,090
1,290
1,770
1,035
1,910
1,115
2,060
2,220
2,395
2,000
1,200
1,425
1,055
1,960
1,140
2,120
1,230
2,295
2,480
2,685
3,000
1,325
1,575
1,165
2,185
1,260
2,365
1,355
2,570
2,790
3,030
4,000
1,465
1,745
1,285
2,445
1,390
2,660
1,500
2,895
3,160
3,455
5,000
1,620
1,940
1,425
2,755
1,540
3,015
1,665
3,300
3,620
3,990
6,000
1,800
- - -
1,580
3,140
1,710
3,450
1,850
3,805
4,220
- - -
7,000
2,000
- - -
1,755
3,615
1,905
4,015
2,060
4,480
- - -
- - -
8,000
- - -
To find the takeoff distance for a pressure altitude of 2,500 feet
at 20 °C, average the ground roll for 2,000 feet and 3,000 feet.
1,115 + 1,230
= 1,173 feet
Figure 11-21. Interpolating charts.
11-20

Sample Problem 3
14,000
Altimeter setting
conversion factor
Pressure altitude
Pressure Altitude...............................................3,000 feet
("Hg)
13,000
OAT.........................................................................30 °C
Takeoff Weight............................................2,400 pounds
12,000
Headwind............................................................18 knots
9,000 Pressure altitude (feet)
28.0
1,824
11,000
Refer to Figure 11-24. This chart is an example of a takeoff
28.1
1,727
distance table for short-field takeoffs. For this table, first find
28.2
1,630
10,000
the takeoff weight. Once at 2,400 pounds, begin reading from
28.3
1,533
Approximate density altitude (thousand feet)
left to right across the table. The takeoff speed is in the second
28.4
1,436
column and, in the third column under pressure altitude, find
28.5
1,340
Standard temperature
the pressure altitude of 3,000 feet. Carefully follow that line
28.6
1,244
to the right until it is under the correct temperature column
28.7
1,148
8,000
of 30 °C. The ground roll total reads 1,325 feet and the total
28.8
1,053
required to clear a 50 foot obstacle is 2,480 feet. At this point,
28.9
there is an 18 knot headwind. According to the notes section
7,000
29.0
under point number two, decrease the distances by ten percent
29.1
for each 9 knots of headwind. With an 18 knot headwind, it
6,000
29.2
is necessary to decrease the distance by 20 percent. Multiply
29.3
1,325 feet by 20 percent (1,325 × .20 = 265), subtract the
5,000
29.4
product from the total distance (1,325 – 265 = 1,060). Repeat
29.5
this process for the total distance over a 50 foot obstacle. The
4,000
29.6
ground roll distance is 1,060 feet and the total distance over
29.7
a 50 foot obstacle is 1,984 feet.
29.8
3,000
29.9
Climb and Cruise Charts
29.92
2,000
Climb and cruise chart information is based on actual flight
30.0
−73
tests conducted in an aircraft of the same type. This information
Sea level
30.1
−165
is extremely useful when planning a cross-country flight to
1,000
30.2
−257
predict the performance and fuel consumption of the aircraft.
30.3
−348
Manufacturers produce several different charts for climb and
30.4
−440
cruise performance. These charts include everything from
–1,000
30.5
−531
fuel, time, and distance to climb to best power setting during
S.L.
C
-18 -12° -7° -1° 4° 10° 16° 21° 27° 32° 38°
cruise to cruise range performance.
30.6
−622
30.7
−712
F
0° 10° 20° 30° 40° 50° 60° 70° 80° 90° 100°
The first chart to check for climb performance is a fuel,
30.8
−803
Outside air temperature
time, and distance-to-climb chart. This chart gives the fuel
amount used during the climb, the time it takes to accomplish
Figure 11-22. Density altitude chart.
the climb, and the ground distance that is covered during
the climb. To use this chart, obtain the information for
straight across to the third reference line and from here, draw
the departing airport and for the cruise altitude. Using
a line in two directions. First, draw a line straight across to
Figure 11-25, calculate the fuel, time, and distance to climb
figure the ground roll distance. Next, follow the diagonal lines
based on the information provided.
again until they reach the corresponding obstacle height. In
this case, it is a 50 foot obstacle. Therefore, draw the diagonal
Sample Problem 4
line to the far edge of the chart. This results in a 700 foot
Departing Airport Pressure Altitude.................6,000 feet
ground roll distance and a total distance of 1,400 feet over a
50 foot obstacle. To find the corresponding takeoff speeds
Departing Airport OAT............................................25 °C
at lift-off and over the 50 foot obstacle, refer to the table on
Cruise Pressure Altitude..................................10,000 feet
the top of the chart. In this case, the lift-off speed at 2,600
pounds would be 63 knots and over the 50 foot obstacle
Cruise OAT..............................................................10 °C
would be 68 knots.
11-21

6,000
Guide lines not
Takeoff speed
Associated conditions
Weight
Reference line
Reference line
Reference line
applicable for
Lift-off
50 ft
pounds
Power
Full throttle 2,600 rpm
kts
MPH
kts
MPH
5,000
Intermediate
Mixture Lean to appropriate fuel
2,950
pressure
Obstacle heights
2,800
Flaps
Up
Tailwind
2,600
Landing Retract after positive
4,000
gear
climb established
2,400
2,200
Cowl
Open
flaps
3,000
Headwind
Pressure altitude - feet ISA
2,000
10,000
8,000
6,000
1,000
4,000
2,000
S.L.
C -40° -30° -20° -10° 0°
10° 20° 30° 40° 50°
2,800
2,600
2,400
2,200 0
Outside air temperature
Weight
Wind component Obstacle
(pounds)
(knots)
height (feet)
F
-40° -20°
0°
20° 40°
60° 80° 100° 120°
Figure 11-23. Takeoff distance graph.
Flaps 10°
TAKEOFF DISTANCE
Notes Conditions
Full throttle prior to brake release
MAXIMUM WEIGHT 2,400 LB
Paved level runway
SHORT FIELD
Zero wind
1. Prior to takeoff from fields above 3,000 feet elevation, the mixture should be leaned to give maximum rpm in a full throttle, static runup.
2. Decrease distances 10% for each 9 knots headwind. For operation with tailwind up to 10 knots, increase distances by 10% for each 2 knots.
3. For operation on a dry, grass runway, increase distances by 15% of the “ground roll” figure.
Takeoff
0 °C
10 °C
20 °C
30 °C
40 °C
speed KIAS
Press
Total feet
Total feet
ALT
Weight
Total feet
Total feet
Total feet
Grnd
Grnd
Grnd
Grnd
Grnd
to clear
(lb)
to clear
(ft)
to clear
to clear
to clear
Lift
AT
roll
roll
roll
roll
roll
50 ft OBS
50 ft OBS
50 ft OBS
50 ft OBS
50 ft OBS
off
50 ft
(ft)
(ft)
(ft)
(ft)
(ft)
1,460
2,400
1,570
S.L.
1,810
1,065
1,945
1,685
1,605
1,725
1,000
1,090
2,000
1,170
2,155
1,015
1,860
1,770
1,035
1,910
2,000
1,200
2,220
1,290
2,395
1,115
2,060
1,055
1,960
1,140
2,120
3,000
1,325
2,480
1,425
2,685
1,230
2,295
ee
1,165
2,185
1,260
2,365
4,000
1,465
2,790
1,575
3,030
1,355
2,570
1,285
2,445
1,390
2,660
5,000
1,620
3,160
1,745
3,455
1,500
2,895
1,425
2,755
1,540
3,015
6,000
1,800
3,620
1,940
3,990
1,665
3,300
1,580
3,140
1,710
3,450
7,000
2,000
4,220
- - -
- - -
1,850
3,805
1,755
3,615
1,905
4,015
8,000
- - -
- - -
- - -
- - -
2,060
4,480
2,200
1,195
1,280
S.L.
1,470
1,575
1,375
1,310
1,405
1,000
1,615
1,735
1,510
1,440
1,545
2,000
1,785
1,045
1,915
1,660
1,585
1,705
3,000
1,070
1,975
1,150
2,130
1,835
1,750
1,020
1,890
4,000
1,180
2,200
1,270
2,375
1,100
2,040
1,040
1,945
1,125
2,105
5,000
1,305
2,465
1,405
2,665
1,210
2,275
1,150
2,170
1,240
2,355
6,000
1,445
2,775
1,555
3,020
1,340
2,555
1,270
2,440
1,375
2,655
7,000
1,605
3,155
1,730
3,450
1,485
2,890
1,410
2,760
1,525
3,015
8,000
1,785
3,630
1,925
4,005
1,650
3,305
2,000
1,035
S.L.
1,185
1,265
1,110
1,060
1,135
1,000
1,295
1,385
1,215
1,160
1,240
2,000
1,425
1,525
1,330
1,270
1,365
3,000
1,570
1,685
1,465
1,400
1,500
4,000
1,735
1,015
1,865
1,615
1,545
1,660
5,000
2,145
1,925
1,120
2,070
1,790
1,710
1,845
6,000
2,405
2,145
1,235
2,315
1,070
1,990
1,015
1,900
1,095
2,055
7,000
2,715
2,405
1,370
2,605
1,180
2,225
1,125
2,125
1,215
2,305
8,000
1,410
2,715
1,520
2,950
1,310
2,500
Figure 11-24. Takeoff distance short field charts.
11-22

20,000
T - feet
iles
s
te
utical m
ure AL
s
minu
n
Press
Fuel - gallo
18,000
ce - na
Time -
16,000
istan
D
14,000
Cruise
12,000
Associated conditions
10,000
Maximum continuous power*
3,600 lb gross weight
8,000
Flaps up
6,000
90 KIAS
No wind
4,000
* 2,700 rpm & 36 in M.P. (3-blade prop)
2,000
2,575 rpm & 36 in M.P. (2-blade prop)
Departure
Sea level
-40° -30° -20° -10° 0°
10° 20° 30° 40°C
Outside air temperature
Fuel, time and distance to climb
Figure 11-25. Fuel, time, and distance climb chart.
First, find the information for the departing airport. Find the
To begin, find the given weight of 3,400 in the first column of
OAT for the departing airport along the bottom, left side of the
the chart. Move across to the pressure altitude column to find
graph. Follow the line from 25 °C straight up until it intersects
the sea level altitude numbers. At sea level, the numbers read
the line corresponding to the pressure altitude of 6,000 feet.
zero. Next, read the line that corresponds with the cruising
Continue this line straight across until it intersects all three
altitude of 8,000 feet. Normally, a pilot would subtract these
lines for fuel, time, and distance. Draw a line straight down
from the intersection of altitude and fuel, altitude and time, and
Flaps up
Gear up
a third line at altitude and distance. It should read three and
Notes Conditions
2,500 rpm
NORMAL CLIMB
30 "Hg
one-half gallons of fuel, 6 minutes of time, and nine NM. Next,
110 KIAS
120 PPH fuel flow
repeat the steps to find the information for the cruise altitude.
Cowl flaps open
Standard temperature
It should read six gallons of fuel, 10.5 minutes of time, and
1. Add 16 pounds of fuel for engine start, taxi, and takeoff allowance.
15 NM. Take each set of numbers for fuel, time, and distance
2. Increase time, fuel, and distance by 10% for each 7 °C above standard
and subtract them from one another (6.0 – 3.5 = 2.5 gallons of
temperature.
3. Distances shown are based on zero wind.
fuel). It takes two and one-half gallons of fuel and 4 minutes
of time to climb to 10,000 feet. During that climb, the distance
From sea level
Rate of
Press
Weight
covered is six NM. Remember, according to the notes at the
climb
ALT
Distance
(pounds)
Time
Fuel used
fpm
(feet)
(nautical
top of the chart, these numbers do not take into account wind,
(minutes)
(pounds)
miles)
and it is assumed maximum continuous power is being used.
S.L.
4,000
4,000
8,000
The next example is a fuel, time, and distance-to-climb table.
12,000
16,000
For this table, use the same basic criteria as for the previous
20,000
chart. However, it is necessary to figure the information in a
3,700
S.L.
4,000
different manner. Refer to Figure 11-26 to work the following
8,000
sample problem.
12,000
16,000
20,000
Sample Problem 5
S.L.
4,000
Departing Airport Pressure Altitude..................Sea level
3,400
8,000
12,000
16,000
Departing Airport OAT............................................22 °C
20,000
Cruise Pressure Altitude....................................8,000 feet
Figure 11-26. Fuel time distance climb.
Takeoff Weight.............................................3,400 pounds
11-23

two sets of numbers from one another, but given the fact that
the numbers read zero at sea level, it is known that the time
to climb from sea level to 8,000 feet is 10 minutes. It is also
known that 21 pounds of fuel is used and 20 NM is covered
during the climb. However, the temperature is 22 °C, which is
7° above the standard temperature of 15 °C. The notes section
of this chart indicate that the findings must be increased by ten
percent for each 7° above standard. Multiply the findings by
ten percent or .10 (10 × .10 = 1, 1 + 10 = 11 minutes). After
accounting for the additional ten percent, the findings should
read 11 minutes, 23.1 pounds of fuel, and 22 NM. Notice that
the fuel is reported in pounds of fuel, not gallons. Aviation
fuel weighs six pounds per gallon, so 23.1 pounds of fuel is
equal to 3.85 gallons of fuel (23.1 ÷ 6 = 3.85).
The next example is a cruise and range performance chart.
This type of table is designed to give TAS, fuel consumption,
endurance in hours, and range in miles at specific cruise
configurations. Use Figure 11-27 to determine the cruise and
range performance under the given conditions.
Sample Problem 6
Pressure Altitude...............................................5,000 feet
RPM..................................................................2,400 rpm
Fuel Carrying Capacity..................38 gallons, no reserve
Find 5,000 feet pressure altitude in the first column on the
left side of the table. Next, find the correct rpm of 2,400
in the second column. Follow that line straight across and
read the TAS of 116 mph and a fuel burn rate of 6.9 gallons
per hour. As per the example, the aircraft is equipped with
a fuel carrying capacity of 38 gallons. Under this column,
read that the endurance in hours is 5.5 hours and the range
in miles is 635 miles.
Cruise power setting tables are useful when planning cross-
country flights. The table gives the correct cruise power
settings, as well as the fuel flow and airspeed performance
numbers at that altitude and airspeed.
Sample Problem 7
Pressure Altitude at Cruise................................6,000 feet
OAT..................................................36 °F above standard
Refer to Figure 11-28 for this sample problem. First, locate
the pressure altitude of 6,000 feet on the far left side of the
table. Follow that line across to the far right side of the table
under the 20 °C (or 36 °F) column. At 6,000 feet, the rpm
setting of 2,450 will maintain 65 percent continuous power
at 21.0 "Hg with a fuel flow rate of 11.5 gallons per hour and
airspeed of 161 knots.
11-24
Gross weight—2,300 lb.
Notes Conditions
Standard conditions
Zero wind
Lean mixture
Maximum cruise is normally limited to 75% power.
38 gal
48 gal
GAL/
ALT
RPM
%
TAS
(no reserve)
(no reserve)
Hour
BHP
MPH
Endr.
Range
Endr.
Range
hours
miles
hours
miles
9.7
3.9
4.9
2,500
2,700
8.6
4.4
5.6
2,600
7.8
4.9
6.2
2,500
7.2
5.3
6.7
2,400
6.7
5.7
7.2
2,300
6.3
6.1
7.7
2,200
9.0
4.2
5.3
5,000
2,700
8.1
4.7
5.9
2,600
7.4
5.1
6.4
2,500
6.9
5.5
6.9
2,400
rs
6.5
5.9
7.4
2,300
6.0
6.3
7.9
2,200
8.4
4.5
5.7
7,500
2,700
7.7
4.9
6.2
2,600
7.1
5.3
6.7
2,500
6.7
5.7
7.2
2,400
6.2
6.1
7.7
2,300
7.6
5.0
6.3
10,000
2,650
7.3
5.2
6.5
2,600
6.9
5.5
7.0
2,500
2,400
6.4
5.9
7.5
6.0
6.3
8.0
2,300
Figure 11-27. Cruise and range performance.
Another type of cruise chart is a best power mixture range
graph. This graph gives the best range based on power
setting and altitude. Using Figure 11-29, find the range at
65 percent power with and without a reserve based on the
provided conditions.
Sample Problem 8
OAT....................................................................Standard
Pressure Altitude...............................................5,000 feet
First, move up the left side of the graph to 5,000 feet and
standard temperature. Follow the line straight across the
graph until it intersects the 65 percent line under both the
reserve and no reserve categories. Draw a line straight down
from both intersections to the bottom of the graph. At 65
percent power with a reserve, the range is approximately
522 miles. At 65 percent power with no reserve, the range
should be 581 miles.
The last cruise chart referenced is a cruise performance graph.
This graph is designed to tell the TAS performance of the
airplane depending on the altitude, temperature, and power
setting. Using Figure 11-30, find the TAS performance based
on the given information.

CRUISE POWER SETTING
65% MAXIMUM CONTINUOUS POWER (OR FULL THROTTLE)
2,800 POUNDS
ISA –20° (–36 °F)
Standard day (ISA)
ISA +20° (+36 °F)
Fuel
Fuel
Fuel
Engine
Man.
Engine
Man.
Engine
Man.
IOAT
flow per
TAS
IOAT
flow per
TAS
IOAT
flow per
TAS
Press
speed
press
speed
press
speed
press
engine
engine
engine
ALT
°F
°C
RPM
"HG
PSI GPH
kts
MPH
°F
°C
RPM
"HG
PSI GPH
kts
MPH
°F
°C
RPM
"HG
PSI GPH
kts
MPH
2,450
2,450
6.6
6.6
11.5
11.5
21.2
–3
21.8
2,450
20.7
6.6
11.5
S.L.
2,450
2,450
6.6
6.6
11.5
11.5
21.0
–7
21.5
2,450
20.4
6.6
11.5
2,000
2,450
2,450
6.6
6.6
11.5
11.5
20.7
–11
21.3
2,450
20.1
6.6
11.5
4,000
2,450
2,450
6.6
6.6
11.5
11.5
20.4
–15
21.0
2,450
19.8
6.6
11.5
6,000
2,450
2,450
6.6
6.6
11.5
11.5
20.2
–2
–19
20.8
2,450
19.5
6.6
11.5
8,000
2,450
2,450
6.6
6.5
11.5
11.4
–2
19.9
–8
–22
20.3
2,450
19.2
6.6
11.5
10,000
2,450
2,450
6.1
5.9
10.9
10.6
–6
18.8
–15
–26
18.8
2,450
18.8
6.4
11.3
12,000
2,450
2,450
5.6
5.4
10.1
9.8
–10
17.4
–22
–30
17.4
2,450
17.4
5.8
10.5
14,000
2,450
2,450
5.1
4.9
9.4
9.1
–14
16.1
–29
–34
16.1
2,450
16.1
5.3
9.7
16,000
Notes
1. Full throttle manifold pressure settings are approximate.
2. Shaded area represents operation with full throttle.
Figure 11-28. Cruise power setting.
Sample Problem 9
65 percent, best power line. This is the solid line, that
represents best economy. Draw a line straight down from
OAT.........................................................................16 °C
this intersection to the bottom of the graph. The TAS at 65
Pressure Altitude...............................................6,000 feet
percent best power is 140 knots. However, it is necessary
to subtract 8 knots from the speed since there are no wheel
Power Setting................................65 percent, best power
fairings. This note is listed under the title and conditions.
Wheel Fairings..............................................Not installed
The TAS is 132 knots.
Begin by finding the correct OAT on the bottom left side of
Crosswind and Headwind Component Chart
the graph. Move up that line until it intersects the pressure
Every aircraft is tested according to Federal Aviation
altitude of 6,000 feet. Draw a line straight across to the
Administration (FAA) regulations prior to certification. The
aircraft is tested by a pilot with average piloting skills in
-13°
90° crosswinds with a velocity up to 0.2 VS0 or two-tenths
45 minutes reserve at 55%
No reserve
power best economy mixture
of the aircraft’s stalling speed with power off, gear down,
-9°
Power 55%
Power 65%
Power 65%
Power 55%
and flaps down. This means that if the stalling speed of the
aircraft is 45 knots, it must be capable of landing in a 9-knot,
-5°
90° crosswind. The maximum demonstrated crosswind
Power 75%
Power 75%
-1°
component is published in the AFM/POH. The crosswind and
headwind component chart allows for figuring the headwind
3°
and crosswind component for any given wind direction and
velocity.
7°
Range may be reduced
Notes
by up to 7% if wheel
fairings are not installed
Sample Problem 10
11°
Runway..........................................................................17
15°
S.L.
Wind........................................................140° at 25 knots
Standard Temperature °C
Range (nautical miles)
Pressure ALT (1,000 feet)
(Includes distance to climb and descend)
Refer to Figure 11-31 to solve this problem. First, determine
Associated conditions
how many degrees difference there is between the runway
Add 0.6 NM for each
Mixture Leaned per section 4
degree Celsius above
and the wind direction. It is known that runway 17 means
standard temperature
Weight 2,300 lb.
Notes
and subtract 1 NM for
a direction of 170°; from that subtract the wind direction
Wings No
each degree Celsius
Fuel
48 gal usable
below standard
of 140°. This gives a 30° angular difference or wind angle.
temperature.
Wheel
Fairings installed
Next, locate the 30° mark and draw a line from there until
Cruise
Mid cruise
it intersects the correct wind velocity of 25 knots. From
Figure 11-29. Best power mixture range.
11-25

Notes
Subtract 8 knots if wheel
fairings are not installed.
20,000
Standard temperature
Power 75%
Power 55%
Power 65%
18,000
Best power
2,575 rpm at 36 IN. M.P. – 2-blade prop
16,000
Best economy
2,700 rpm at 36 IN. M.P. – 3-blade prop
Pressure ALT (feet)
14,000
Associated conditions
12,000
Weight
3,600 lb. gross weight
10,000
Flaps
Up
8,000
Best power
Mixture leaned to 100°
rich of peak EGT
6,000
Best economy Mixture leaned to peak EGT
4,000
1,650° Max allowable EGT
Sea level
2,000
Wheel
Fairings installed
–40° –30° –20° –10° 0°
10° 20° 30° 40°
Outside air temperature (°C)
True airspeed (knots)
Figure 11-30. Cruise performance graph.
there, draw a line straight down and a line straight across.
usual, read the associated conditions and notes in order to
The headwind component is 22 knots and the crosswind
ascertain the basis of the chart information. Remember, when
component is 13 knots. This information is important when
calculating landing distance that the landing weight is not the
taking off and landing so that, first of all, the appropriate
same as the takeoff weight. The weight must be recalculated
runway can be picked if more than one exists at a particular
to compensate for the fuel that was used during the flight.
airport, but also so that the aircraft is not pushed beyond its
Sample Problem 11
tested limits.
Pressure Altitude...............................................1,250 feet
Landing Charts
Temperature.........................................................Standard
Landing performance is affected by variables similar to those
affecting takeoff performance. It is necessary to compensate
Refer to Figure 10-32. This example makes use of a landing
for differences in density altitude, weight of the airplane, and
distance table. Notice that the altitude of 1,250 feet is not
headwinds. Like takeoff performance charts, landing distance
on this table. It is, therefore, necessary to interpolate to find
information is available as normal landing information,
the correct landing distance. The pressure altitude of 1,250
as well as landing distance over a 50 foot obstacle. As
is halfway between sea level and 2,500 feet. First, find the
column for sea level and the column for 2,500 feet. Take the
|
0°
|
10°
total distance of 1,075 for sea level and the total distance of
|
20°
1,135 for 2,500 and add them together. Divide the total by
30°
two to obtain the distance for 1,250 feet. The distance is 1,105
|
Wi
40°
feet total landing distance to clear a 50 foot obstacle. Repeat
nd
v
elo
cit
Headwind component
this process to obtain the ground roll distance for the pressure
y
|
50°
altitude. The ground roll should be 457.5 feet.
|
60°
Sample Problem 12
OAT.......................................................................... 57 °F
|
70°
Pressure Altitude.............................................. 4,000 feet
Landing Weight...........................................2,400 pounds
__|
80°
Headwind.............................................................. 6 knots
=
90°
Obstacle Height..................................................... 50 feet
Using the given conditions and Figure 11-33, determine the
Crosswind component
landing distance for the aircraft. This graph is an example of
Figure 10-31. Crosswind component chart.
11-26

LANDING DISTANCE
Flaps lowered to 40°
Conditions
Power off
Hard surface runway
Zero wind
oY
At sea level & 59 °F
At 5,000 ft & 41 °F
At 7,500 ft & 32 °F
At 2,500 ft & 50 °F
Gross
Approach speed
weight
IAS, MPH
=
Total to clear
Total to clear
Total to clear
Total to clear
lb
Ground roll
Ground roll
Ground roll
Ground roll
50 ft OBS
50 ft OBS
50 ft OBS
50 ft OBS
1,600
1,075
1,135
1,195
1,255
1. Decrease the distances shown by 10% for each 4 knots of headwind.
Note
2. Increase the distance by 10% for each 60 °F temperature increase above standard.
3. For operation on a dry, grass runway, increase distances (both “ground roll” and “total to clear 50 ft obstacle”) by 20% of the “total to clear 50 ft obstacle” figure.
Figure 11-32. Landing distance table.
Stall Speed Performance Charts
a combined landing distance graph and allows compensation
for temperature, weight, headwinds, tailwinds, and varying
Stall speed performance charts are designed to give an
obstacle height. Begin by finding the correct OAT on the
understanding of the speed at which the aircraft stalls in
scale on the left side of the chart. Move up in a straight
a given configuration. This type of chart typically takes
line to the correct pressure altitude of 4,000 feet. From this
into account the angle of bank, the position of the gear and
intersection, move straight across to the first dark reference
flaps, and the throttle position. Use Figure 11-34 and the
line. Follow the lines in the same diagonal fashion until the
accompanying conditions to find the speed at which the
correct landing weight is reached. At 2,400 pounds, continue
airplane stalls.
in a straight line across to the second dark reference line.
Once again, draw a line in a diagonal manner to the correct
Sample Problem 13
wind component and then straight across to the third dark
Power........................................................................ OFF
reference line. From this point, draw a line in two separate
Flaps....................................................................... Down
directions: one straight across to figure the ground roll and
one in a diagonal manner to the correct obstacle height. This
Gear........................................................................ Down
should be 975 feet for the total ground roll and 1,500 feet for
Angle of Bank............................................................. 45°
the total distance over a 50 foot obstacle.
First, locate the correct flap and gear configuration. The
bottom half of the chart should be used since the gear and
3,500
applicable for Intermediate
Speed
Guide lines not
Associated conditions
Obstacle heights
Weight
Reference line
Reference line
Reference line
at 50 feet
(pounds)
3,000
Power
Retarded to maintain
kts
MPH
900 feet/on final approach
2,950
Flaps
Down
2,800
Landing gear
Down
2,500
2,600
Runway
Paved, level, dry surface
Tailwind
2,400
Approach speed
IAS as tabulated
2,200
Braking
Maximum
2,000
Pressure altitude (feet)
1,500
Headwind
10,000
8,000
6,000
4,000
2,000
1,000
S.L.
ISA
C –40° –30° –20° –10°
0°
10° 20° 30° 40° 50°
2,800
2,600
2,400
2,200 0
Outside air temperature
Weight
Wind component Obstacle
(pounds)
(knots)
height (feet)
F
–40° –20° 0°
20° 40°
60° 80° 100° 120°
Figure 11-33. Landing distance graph.
11-27

Air Carrier Obstacle Clearance
Angle of bank
Requirements
Gross weight
|
Level
30°
45°
60°
2,750 lb
Gear and flaps up
For information on air carrier obstacle clearance
MPH
On
Power
requirements consult the Instrument Procedures Handbook,
knots
MPH
FAA-H-8083-16 (as revised).
Off
knots
Gear and flaps down
Chapter Summary
MPH
On
knots
Power
Performance characteristics and capabilities vary greatly
MPH
Y
Off
knots
f
among aircraft. As transport aircraft become more capable
and more complex, most operators find themselves having
Figure 11-34. Stall speed table.
to rely increasingly on computerized flight mission planning
systems. These systems may be on board or used during
flaps are down. Next, choose the row corresponding to a
the planning phase of the flight. Moreover, aircraft weight,
power-off situation. Now, find the correct angle of bank
atmospheric conditions, and external environmental factors
column, which is 45°. The stall speed is 78 mph, and the
can significantly affect aircraft performance. It is essential
stall speed in knots would be 68 knots.
that a pilot become intimately familiar with the mission
planning programs, performance characteristics, and
Performance charts provide valuable information to the pilot.
capabilities of the aircraft being flown, as well as all of the
By using these charts, a pilot can predict the performance of
onboard computerized systems in today’s complex aircraft.
the aircraft under most flying conditions, providing a better
The primary source of this information is the AFM/POH.
plan for every flight. The Code of Federal Regulations (CFR)
requires that a pilot be familiar with all information available
prior to any flight. Pilots should use the information to their
advantage as it can only contribute to safety in flight.
Transport Category Aircraft Performance
Transport category aircraft are certificated under Title 14
of the CFR (14 CFR) part 25. For additional information
concerning transport category airplanes, consult the Airplane
Flying Handbook, FAA-H-8083-3 (as revised).
Transport category helicopters are certificated under 14
CFR part 29.
11-28