Introduction
There are many factors in the safe and efficient operation of
aircraft, including proper weight and balance control. The
weight and balance system commonly employed among
aircraft consists of three equally important elements: the
weighing of the aircraft, the maintaining of the weight and
balance records, and the proper loading of the aircraft. An
inaccuracy in any one of these elements defeats the purpose
of the system. The finalloading calculations are meaningless
if either the aircraft has been improperly weighed or the
records contain an error.
Improper loading decreases the effic ency and performance of
an aircraft from the standpoint of altitude, maneuverability,
rate of climb, and speed. It may even be the cause of failure
to complete the flight or, for that matter, failure to start the
flight.Because of abnormal stresses placed upon the structure
of an improperly loaded aircraft, or because of changed fly ng
characteristics of the aircraft, loss of life and destruction of
valuable equipment may result.
Weight and Balance
Control

Aircraft can perform safely and achieve their designed
efficiency only when they are operated and maintained in the
way their designers intended. This safety and efficiency is
determined to a large degree by holding the aircraft’s weight
and balance parameters within the limits specifiedfor its design.
The remainder of this handbook describes how this is done.
Responsibility for Weight and Balance
Control
The responsibility for proper weight and balance control
begins with the engineers and designers and extends to the
technicians who maintain the aircraft and the pilots who
operate them. Modern aircraft are engineered utilizing state-
of-the-art technology and materials to achieve maximum
reliability and performance for the intended category. As
much care and expertise must be exercised in operating
and maintaining these efficient aircraft as was taken in their
design and manufacturing:
1.
The designers of an aircraft set the maximum weight
based on the amount of lift the wings or rotors can
provide under the operational conditions for which
the aircraft is designed. The structural strength of the
aircraft also limits the maximum weight the aircraft
can safely carry. The designers carefully determine
the ideal center of gravity (CG) and calculate the
maximum allowable deviation from this specific
location.
2.
The manufacturer provides the aircraft operator with
the empty weight of the aircraft and the location of its
empty weight center of gravity (EWCG) at the time
the certifiedaircraft leaves the factory. Amateur-built
aircraft must have this information determined and
available at the time of certification
3.
The FAA-certificated mechanic or repairman who
maintains the aircraft keeps the weight and balance
records current, recording any changes that have been
made because of repairs or alterations.
4.
The pilot in command (PIC) has the responsibility
prior to every flight to know the maximum allowable
weight of the aircraft and its CG limits. This allows
the pilot to determine during the preflight inspection
that the aircraft is loaded so that the CG is within the
allowable limits.
Terminology
Pilots and FAA-certificated mechanics or repairmen must
ensure they understand the terms as they relate to the
aircraft in question. For small aircraft terminology, use
the information found in sources associated with Civil
Air Regulation (CAR) 3 certification or General Aviation
Manufacturers Association (GAMA) Specification No. 1
for part 23 aircraft or part 27 for rotorcraft. For terminology
applied to large part 25 aircraft, information can be found
in Advisory Circular (AC) 120-27, Aircraft Weight and
Balance Control. The glossary contains the most current
terms and defin tions. Current regulations are available from
the Superintendent of Documents; U.S. Government Printing
Office;Washington, DC 20402. They are also located on the
FAA website at www.faa.gov. Earlier regulations may be
available in libraries or in the Federal Register.
Weight Control
Weight is a major factor in airplane construction and
operation, and it demands respect from all pilots and
particular diligence by all maintenance personnel. Excessive
weight reduces the efficiencyof an aircraft and the available
safety margin if an emergency condition should arise.
When an aircraft is designed, it is made as light as the
required structural strength allows, and the wings or rotors are
designed to support the maximum allowable weight. When
the weight of an aircraft is increased, the wings or rotors must
produce additional lift and the structure must support not
only the additional static loads, but also the dynamic loads
imposed by flight maneuvers. For example, the wings of a
3,000-pound airplane must support 3,000 pounds in level
flight, but when the airplane is turned smoothly and sharply
using a bank angle of 60°, the dynamic load requires the
wings to support twice this or 6,000 pounds.
Severe uncoordinated maneuvers or flight into turbulence
can impose dynamic loads on the structure great enough
to cause failure. In accordance with Title 14 of the Code
of Federal Regulations (14 CFR) part 23, the structure of a
normal category airplane must be strong enough to sustain
a load factor of 3.8 times its weight. Every pound of weight
added to a normal category aircraft requires that the structure
be strong enough to support 3.8 pounds. An aircraft operated
in the utility category must sustain a load factor of 4.4 times
its weight, and acrobatic category aircraft must be strong
enough to withstand 6.0 times their weight.
The lift produced by a wing is determined by its airfoil shape,
angle of attack, speed through the air, and air density. When
an aircraft takes off from an airport with a high density
altitude, it must accelerate to a speed faster than would be
required at sea level to produce enough lift to allow takeoff;
therefore, a longer takeoff run is necessary. The distance
needed may be longer than the available runway. When
operating from a high density altitude airport, the Pilot’s
Operating Handbook (POH) or Airplane Flight Manual
(AFM) must be consulted to determine the maximum weight
allowed for the aircraft under the conditions of altitude,
temperature, wind, and runway conditions.

Effects of Weight
Most modern aircraft are so designed that, when all seats
are occupied, the baggage compartment is full, and all fuel
tanks are full, the aircraft is grossly overloaded. This type
of design requires the pilot to give great consideration to
the requirements of each specific flight. If maximum range
is required, occupants or baggage must be left behind, or if
the maximum load must be carried, the range, dictated by
the amount of fuel on board, must be reduced.
Overloading an aircraft can create a variety of problems:
•
The aircraft needs a higher takeoff speed, which results
in a longer takeoff run.
•
Both the rate and angle of climb are reduced.
•
The service ceiling is lowered.
•
The cruising speed is reduced.
•
The cruising range is shortened.
•
Maneuverability is decreased.
•
A longer landing roll is required because the landing
speed is higher.
•
Excessive loads are imposed on the structure,
especially the landing gear.
The POH or AFM includes tables or charts that give the pilot
an indication of the performance expected for any weight.
An important part of careful preflight planning includes a
check of these charts to determine if the aircraft is loaded so
the proposed flight can be safely made
Weight Changes
The maximum allowable weight for an aircraft is determined
by design considerations. However, the maximum operational
weight may be less than the maximum allowable weight due
to such considerations as high density altitude or high-drag
fieldconditions caused by wet grass or water on the runway.
The maximum operational weight may also be limited by the
departure or arrival airport’s runway length.
One important preflight consideration is the distribution
of the load in the aircraft. Loading the aircraft so the gross
weight is less than the maximum allowable is not enough.
This weight must be distributed to keep the CG within the
limits specified in the POH or AFM
If the CG is too far forward, a heavy passenger can be moved
to one of the rear seats or baggage may be shifted from a
forward baggage compartment to a rear compartment. If the
CG is too far aft, passenger weight or baggage can be shifted
forward. The fuel load should be balanced laterally. The pilot
should pay special attention to the POH or AFM regarding
the operation of the fuel system in order to keep the aircraft
balanced in flight
Weight and balance of a helicopter is far more critical
than for an airplane. Some helicopters may be properly
loaded for takeoff, but near the end of a long flight when
the fuel tanks are almost empty, the CG may have shifted
enough for the helicopter to be out of balance laterally or
longitudinally. Before making any long flight, the CG with
the fuel available for landing must be checked to ensure it is
within the allowable range.
Airplanes with tandem seating normally have a limitation
requiring solo flight to be made from the front seat in some
airplanes or the rear seat in others. Some of the smaller
helicopters also require solo flight be made from a specific
seat, either the right, left, or center. These seating limitations
are noted by a placard, usually on the instrument panel, and
they should be strictly followed.
As an aircraft ages, its weight usually increases due to debris
and dirt collecting in hard-to-reach locations and moisture
absorbed in the cabin insulation. This increase in weight is
normally small, but it can be determined only by accurately
weighing the aircraft.
Changes of fixed equipment may have a major effect upon
the weight of the aircraft. Many aircraft are overloaded by
the installation of extra radios or instruments. Fortunately,
the replacement of older, heavy electronic equipment with
newer, lighter types results in a weight reduction. This
weight change, however helpful, can cause the CG to shift,
which must be computed and annotated in the weight and
balance record.
Repairs and alterations are the major sources of weight
changes. It is the responsibility of the FAA-certificate
mechanic or repairman making any repair or alteration to
know the weight and location of a change, to compute the
CG, record the new empty weight and EWCG in the aircraft
weight and balance record, and update the equipment lists.
If the newly calculated EWCG should happen to fall outside
the EWCG range, it is necessary to perform an adverse-
loading check. This requires a forward and rearward
adverse-loading check and a maximum weight check.
These weight and balance extreme conditions represent the
maximum forward and rearward CG position for the aircraft.
An adverse-loading check is a deliberate attempt to load an
aircraft in a manner that creates the most critical balance
condition and still remains within the design CG limits of the
aircraft. If any of the checks fall outside the loaded CG range,

Figure 1-1. Longitudinal forces acting on an airplane in flight.
Lift
Variable
Nose-up force
dependent upon airspeed
Fixed
Nose-down force
independent of airspeed
CG
Figure 1-2. If the CG is too far aft at the low stall airspeed, there
might not be enough elevator nose-down authority to get the nose
down for recovery.
Lift
Insufficient elevator
Nose-down force
CG too far aft
CG
Figure 1-3. If the CG is too far forward, there is not enough elevator
nose-up force to flare the airplane for landing.
Lift
Insufficient elevator
Nose-up force
CG too far forward
CG
the aircraft must be reconfigured or placarded to prevent the
pilot from loading the aircraft improperly. It is sometimes
possible to install a fixed ballast in order for the aircraft to
operate again within the normal CG range.
The FAA-certificated mechanic or repairman conducting an
annual or condition inspection must ensure the weight and
balance data in the aircraft records is current and accurate. It
is the responsibility of the PIC to use the most current weight
and balance data when operating the aircraft.
Stability and Balance Control
Balance control refers to the location of the CG of an aircraft.
This is of primary importance to aircraft stability, which is a
factor in flight safety. The CG is the point at which the total
weight of the aircraft is assumed to be concentrated, and the
CG must be located within specificlimits for safe flight.Both
lateral and longitudinal balance are important, but the prime
concern is longitudinal balance; that is, the location of the
CG along the longitudinal or lengthwise axis.
An airplane is designed to have stability that allows it to be
trimmed to maintain straight-and-level flight with hands off
the controls. Longitudinal stability is maintained by ensuring
the CG is slightly ahead of the center of lift. This produces a
fixed nose-down force independent of the airspeed. This is
balanced by a variable nose-up force, which is produced by a
downward aerodynamic force on the horizontal tail surfaces
that varies directly with the airspeed. [Figure 1-1]
If a rising air current should cause the nose to pitch up, the
airplane slows and the downward force on the tail decreases.
The weight concentrated at the CG pulls the nose back down.
If the nose should drop in flight, the airspeed increases and
the increased downward tail load brings the nose back up
to level flight
As long as the CG is maintained within the allowable limits
for its weight, the airplane has adequate longitudinal stability
and control. If the CG is too far aft, it is too near the center
of lift; the airplane is unstable and difficult to recover from
a stall. [Figure 1-2] If the unstable airplane should enter a
spin, the spin could become flat making recovery difficult
or impossible. If the CG is too far forward, the downward
tail load needs to be increased to maintain level flight. This
increased tail load has the same effect as carrying additional
weight; the aircraft must fly at a higher angle of attack and
drag increases.
A more serious problem caused by the CG being too far
forward is the lack of sufficient elevator authority. At low
takeoff speeds, the elevator might not produce enough
nose-up force to rotate; on landing there may not be enough
elevator force to flarethe airplane. [Figure 1-3] Both takeoff
and landing runs are lengthened if the CG is too far forward.
The basic aircraft design is such that lateral symmetry is
assumed to exist. For each item of weight added to the left
of the center line of the aircraft (also known as buttock
line zero or BL‑0), there is generally an equal weight at a
corresponding location on the right.
The lateral balance can be upset by uneven fuel loading
or burnoff. The position of the lateral CG is not normally
computed for an airplane, but the pilot must be aware of

Figure 1-4. Lateral imbalance causes wing heaviness, which may
be corrected by deflecting the aileron. The additional lift causes
additional drag, and the airplane flies inefficiently.
Empty
Full
Additional lift and drag
Additional weight
Figure 1-5. Fuel in the tanks of a swept-wing airplane affects both
lateral and longitudinal balance. As fuel is used from an outboard
tank, the CG shifts forward.
Inboard fuel: nose heavy
Outboard fuel: tail heavy
the adverse effects that result from a laterally unbalanced
condition. [Figure 1-4] This is corrected by using the aileron
trim tab until enough fuel has been used from the tank on
the heavy side to balance the airplane. The deflectedtrim tab
deflects the aileron to produce additional lift on the heavy
side, but it also produces additional drag, and the airplane
flies inefficientl
Helicopters are more often affected by lateral imbalance
than airplanes. If a helicopter is loaded with heavy occupants
and fuel on the same side, it could be out of balance enough
to make it unsafe to fly. It is also possible that if external
loads are carried in such a position that requires large lateral
displacement of the cyclic control to maintain level fl ght, the
fore-and-aft cyclic control effectiveness is limited.
Swept-wing airplanes are more critical due to fuel imbalance
because as the fuel is used from the outboard tanks, the CG
shifts forward. As fuel is used from the inboard tanks, the CG
shifts aft. [Figure 1-5] For this reason, fuel-use scheduling
in swept-wing airplanes operation is critical.
Weight Control for Aircraft Other Than
Fixed and Rotor-wing
Some light aircraft utilize different methods of determining
weight and balance from the traditional fixedand rotor-wing
aircraft. These aircraft achieve flight control by methods
different from the fixed-wing airplane or helicopter. Most
notable of these are weight-shift control (WSC) aircraft (also
known as trikes), powered parachutes, and balloons. These
aircraft typically do not specify either an EWCG or a CG
range. They require only a certified or approved maximum
weight. To understand why this is so, a look at how flight
control is achieved is helpful.
Airplanes and WSC aircraft control flightunder the influenc
of the same four forces (lift, gravity, thrust, and drag), and
around the same three axes (pitch, yaw, and roll). However,
each aircraft accomplishes this control in a very different
manner. This difference helps explain why the fixed-wing
airplane requires an established weight and a known CG,
whereas the WSC aircraft only requires the known weight.
The fixed-wing airplane has movable controls that alter lift
on various airfoil surfaces to vary pitch, roll, and yaw. In
turn, these changes in lift affect the characteristics of the
flight parameters. Weight normally decreases in flight due
to fuel consumption, and the airplane CG changes with this
weight reduction. An airplane utilizes its variable fligh
controls to compensate and maintain controllability through
the various flightmodes and as the CG changes. An airplane
has a CG range or envelope within which it must remain if
the flight controls are to remain effective and the airplane
safely operated.
Weight-Shift Control Aircraft
The WSC aircraft has a relatively set platform wing without
a tail. The pilot achieves control by shifting weight. In the
design of this aircraft, the weight of the airframe and its
payload is attached to the wing at a single point in a pendulous
arrangement. The pilot, through the flight controls, controls the
arm of this pendulum and thereby controls the aircraft. When
a change in flight parameter is desired, the pilot displaces the
aircraft’s weight by the appropriate distance and direction.
This change momentarily disrupts the equilibrium between the
four forces acting on the aircraft. The wing, due to its inherent
stability, then moves appropriately to reestablish the desired
relationship between these forces; the wing flexes and alter
its shape. As the shape is changed, lift is varied at different
points on the wing to achieve the desired flight parameters

The flight controls primarily affect the pitch-and-roll axes.
Since there is no vertical tail plane, there is minimal or no
yaw control. Unlike in an airplane, the CG experienced by
the WSC aircraft wing remains constant. Since the weight
of the airframe acts through a single point (the wing attach
point), the range over which the weight may act is fixed at
the pendulum arm or length. Even though weight decreases
as fuel is consumed, weight remains focused at the wing
attach point. Because the range is fixed, there is no need to
establish a calculated range. The pilot should consult the
POH or Aircraft Operating Instructions (AOI) for maximum
takeoff weight and minimum and maximum seat weight
limits prior to each flight
Powered Parachutes
The powered parachute is also a pendulum-style aircraft. Its
airframe CG is fixed at the pendulum attach point. It is more
limited in controllability than the WSC aircraft because it
lacks an aerodynamic pitch control. Pitch (and lift) control
is primarily a function of the power control. Increased power
results in increased lift; cruise power amounts to level flight;
decreased power causes a descent. Due to this characteristic,
the aircraft is basically a one-airspeed aircraft. Once again,
because the CG is fixed at the attach point to the wing, there
is no CG range. As with WSC, the pilot should consult the
POH or AOI for maximum takeoff weight and minimum and
maximum seat weight limits prior to each flight
Roll control on a powered parachute is achieved by changing
the shape of the wing. The change is achieved by varying
the length of steering lines attached to the outboard trailing
edges of the wing. The trailing edge of the parachute is pulled
down slightly on one side or the other to create increased
drag along that side. This change in drag creates roll and
yaw, permitting the aircraft to be steered.
Balloons
The balloon is controlled by the pilot only in the vertical
dimension; this is in contrast to all other aircraft. He or she
achieves this control through the use of lift and weight.
Wind provides all other movement. The CG of the gondola
remains constant beneath the balloon envelope. As in WSC
and powered-parachute aircraft, there is no CG limitation.
Underestimating the Importance of
Weight and Balance
Many pilots, from sport pilot to commercial pilot, tend to
underestimate the importance of proper weight and balance
of their aircraft. Load sheets are taken for granted and hasty
calculations are made of the aircraft’s CG. Unfortunately,
each year there are a number of accidents related to weight
and balance issues. Many of these occurrences could have
been avoided had more attention been given to weight and
balance.
Every student pilot is taught how to work a weight and
balance problem and that it is important to make sure
every flight is loaded “within the envelope” (no more than
maximum gross weight) for both takeoff and landing. But
does he or she really understand just why this is so and the
disastrous effect of being out of the envelope? Two examples
of documented cases are provided below in an effort to
indicate the serious nature of maintaining the proper weight
and balance. In case studies when weight and balance was
listed as the major factor of the accident, many were fatal.
For instance, a small aircraft was loaded with hunters, gear,
and dogs (none of the dogs were secured inside the aircraft).
During takeoff, all the dogs went to the aft of the airplane.
This shifted the CG well aft of its allowable limit. The
airplane stalled and crashed. The airplane was destroyed
with casualties.
Another accident occurred when a group of skydivers were
sitting on the floor toward the aft portion of the airplane
(they were unsecured). During takeoff, the CG was again
well beyond its aft limit. The airplane stalled and crashed.
The airplane was destroyed with casualties.
There is a safety factor built into the formula for maximum
gross weight. Any airplane can fly when it takes off at a
weight greater than maximum gross weight if the runway
is long enough and the density altitude is low enough.
However, landing is a different matter. All airplanes are built
to withstand an occasional hard landing, but what would
happen if the hard landing were combined with a substantially
overweight airplane? Something would probably break at that
time or the structure would be weakened enough to break
sometime in the future when everything might seem normal to
a pilot unaware of the previous situation. Even more disastrous
than an overweight, hard landing is reaching or exceeding
the structural integrity of the metal and/or composite design
values when maneuvering or when turbulence is encountered.
Hidden damage could result, causing an unexpected
catastrophic failure at some future time.
If an airplane is certificated with a maximum gross weight
of 6,000 pounds (its weight on the ground) and is rolled into
a 60° bank, the forces exerted make it feel as if it weighed
12,000 pounds. At its maximum certificated gross weight,
there is no problem because the aircraft is operated within its
certificated maneuvering loads. But loaded to 8,000 pounds
with a 60° bank or an abrupt pullup, it suddenly weighs
16,000 pounds and might not be able to perform! Even if it
could, there would probably be internal stress damage that
would show up on future flights