Introduction
Chapter 2, Weight and Balance Theory, explained the theory
of weight and balance and gave examples of the way the
center of gravity (CG) could be found for a lever loaded
with several weights. In this chapter, the practical aspects
of weighing an airplane and locating its CG are discussed.
Formulas are introduced that allow the CG location to be
measured in inches from various datum locations and in
percentage of the mean aerodynamic chord (MAC).
Weighing the Aircraft and
Determining the Empty Weight
Center of Gravity

Figure 3-1. Platform scales.
Requirements
Regulations do not require periodic weighing of privately
owned and operated aircraft. Such aircraft are usually
weighed when originally certificatedor after major alterations
that can affect the weight and balance. The primary purpose
of aircraft weight and balance control is safety. Manufacturers
conduct extensive flight tests to establish loading limits
for their aircraft because limit information is critical for
safe flight. A secondary purpose is to aid efficiency during
flight. Overloading of the aircraft is not the only concern;
the distribution of the weight is important also. The aircraft
has CG limits, and any loading that places the CG outside
the established limits seriously impairs controllability of
the aircraft.
Weight and balance is of such vital importance that each
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) certificated
mechanic or repairman maintaining an aircraft must be fully
aware of his or her responsibility to provide the pilot with
current and accurate information for the actual weight of the
aircraft and the location of the CG. The pilot in command
(PIC) is responsible for knowing the weight of the load, CG,
maximum allowable weight, and CG limits of the aircraft.
The weight and balance report must include an equipment
list showing weights and moment arms of all required and
optional items of equipment included in the certificate
empty weight.
Weight and balance records used in accounting for and
correcting the CG location are reliable for only limited
periods of time. For this reason, periodic aircraft weighing is
desirable. An aircraft should be reweighed and a new weight
and balance record should be started after the aircraft has
undergone extensive repair or major alteration, when the pilot
reports unsatisfactory flight characteristics (e.g., nose or tail
heaviness), and when recorded weight and balance data are
suspected to be in error.
Repairs and alterations are major sources of weight change.
The airframe and powerplant (A&P) FAA-certificated
mechanic or repairman who is responsible for making any
repair or alteration must:
1.
Establish by computation that the authorized weight
and CG limits as shown in the type certificate data
sheet (TCDS) and aircraft specifications are not
exceeded, and
2.
Record the new empty weight center of gravity
(EWCG) data in the current approved aircraft flight
manual or issued operating limitations.
When an aircraft has undergone extensive repair or major
alteration, it should be reweighed and a new weight and
balance record started. The A&P FAA-certificatedmechanic
or repairman responsible for the work must provide the pilot
with current and accurate aircraft weight information and
location of the EWCG.
Equipment for Weighing
Weighing aircraft with accurately calibrated scales is the only
sure method of obtaining an accurate empty weight and CG
location. The two basic types of scales used to weigh aircraft
are platform and load cell.
Platform scales [Figure 3-1] or ramp wheel scales
[Figure 3-2] (usually a form or modified version of the
platform scale) are low profi e, easy to handle, safe, and
reliable. Tow or push the aircraft wheels or skids onto the
scale pad at ground level. With one scale per wheel, each
device should be capable of measuring up to at least 60,000
pounds since the weight on each wheel rarely exceeds this
figure
Load cell scales [Figure 3-3] are also a reliable means to
weigh aircraft and are typically cheaper than the platform
type.Using load cell scales allows for the aircraft to be set
up and weighed in its level flight attitude. With this method,
the aircraft is placed on jacks with electronic load cells
placed between the jack and the jack pad on the aircraft.
The aircraft is raised on the jacks until the wheels or skids
are off the floor and the aircraft is in a level flight attitude.
The weight measured by each load cell is indicated on the
control panel. Jacking an aircraft off the ground from all
load points can be an inconvenience, as well as a safety
risk, which some operators would rather avoid by opting for
more expensive—but simpler to use—platform equipment.
In addition, weighing with platform scales typically takes
only one-third of the time needed to weigh with load cells.

Figure 3-2. Ramp scales.
Figure 3-3. Load cell scales.
All scales for aviation use, manual or electronic, must be
protected when stored or shipped, and they must be checked
periodically for accuracy. The maximum recognized period
between calibration checks is 12 months; however, this period
may be reduced by an airworthiness authority dependent on
the conditions of use. Scales in daily use may require a shorter
interval and/or testing to determine the continued accuracy
of the unit. Scales should be returned to the manufacturer for
proper calibration and testing.
Preparation for Weighing
In general, weight procedures may vary with the aircraft
and types of weight equipment employed. The weighing
procedure contained in the manufacturer’s maintenance
manual should be followed for each particular aircraft. The
major considerations in preparing an aircraft for weighing
are described in the following paragraphs.
Scale Preparation
Mechanical and electronic scales shall be inspected prior to
use and set to zero. This is done by adding and removing
a weight, then rechecking for zero. This process should be
repeated until a steady zero setting is obtained. The scales
should be located in the same environment in which they

Figure 3-4. Standard fuels and weights with temperatures of 32 °F
and 59 °F.
Weighing Point
AVGAS (Aviation Gasoline)
Water
Oil
Pounds per U.S. Gallon
32 °F
59 °F
are to be used and allowed to come up to temperature at
least 2 hours prior to use. Scales should not be used in
temperature extremes below 40 °F or above 100 °F unless the
scale is specifically designed for use in those temperatures.
Electronic scales are very sensitive and, if subjected to
freezing temperatures, the liquid displays may be damaged
beyond use.
Weigh Clean Aircraft Inside Hangar
The aircraft should be weighed inside a hangar where wind
cannot blow over the surface and cause fluctuating or false
scale readings. The aircraft should be clean inside and out,
with special attention paid to the bilge area to ensure that no
water or debris is trapped there. The outside of the aircraft
should be as free as possible of all mud and dirt.
Equipment List
All of the required equipment must be properly installed, and
there should be no equipment installed that is not included in
the equipment list. If such equipment is installed, the weight
and balance record must be corrected to indicate it.
Ballast
All required permanent ballasts must be properly secured in
place. All temporary ballasts must be removed.
Standard Weights
Standard weights are established weights for numerous items
involved in weight and balance computations. These weights
should not be used if actual weights are available. Some of
the standard weights are listed in Figure 3-4.
Note the difference in weight as temperatures change.
Although this change is a very small amount per gallon, it could
end up in a significanttotal weight gain when dealing with large
quantities of fluids,such as those found in commercial aircraft.
Draining the Fuel
Drain fuel from the tanks in the manner specified by the
aircraft manufacturer. If there are no specific instructions,
drain the fuel until the fuel quantity gauges read empty when
the aircraft is in level-flight attitude. Any fuel remaining in
the system is considered residual or unusable fuel and is part
of the aircraft empty weight.
The amount of residual fuel and its arm are normally found
in Note 1 in the section of the Type Certificate Data Sheets
(TCDS), “Data pertaining to all Models.” For additional fuel
capacity information, see Chapter 2, Weight and Balance
Theory.
If it is not feasible to drain the fuel, the tanks can be topped
off to be sure of the quantity they contain and the aircraft
weighed with full fuel. After weighing is complete, the
weight of the fuel and its moment are subtracted from those
of the aircraft as weighed. To correct the empty weight for
the residual fuel, add its weight and moment.
When computing the weight of the fuel (e.g., a tank full of
jet fuel), measure its specific gravity (sg) with a hydrometer
and multiply it by 8.345 (the nominal weight of 1 gallon of
pure water whose sg is 1.0). If the ambient temperature is
high and the jet fuel in the tank is hot enough for its specific
gravity to reach 0.81 rather than its nominal sg of 0.82, the
fuel actually weighs 6.76 pounds per gallon rather than its
normal weight of 6.84 pounds per gallon.
Oil
The empty weight for aircraft certificated under the Civilian
Air Regulations (CAR) part 3 does not include the engine
lubricating oil. The oil must either be drained before the
aircraft is weighed, or its weight must be subtracted from
the scale readings to determine the empty weight. To weigh
an aircraft that does not include the engine lubricating oil
as part of the empty weight, place it in level flight attitude,
then open the drain valves and allow the oil to drain out.
Any remaining is undrainable oil and is part of the empty
weight. Aircraft certificated under Title 14 of the Code of
Federal Regulations (14 CFR) parts 23 and 25 include full
oil as part of the empty weight. If it is impractical to drain the
oil, the reservoir can be filled to the specified level and the
weight of the oil computed at 7.5 pounds per gallon. Then,
its weight and moment are subtracted from the weight and
moment of the aircraft as weighed. The amount and arm of
the undrainable oil are found in Note 1 of the TCDS, and
this must be added to the empty weight.
Other Fluids
The hydraulic fluid reservoir and all other reservoirs
containing fluidsrequired for normal operation of the aircraft
should be full. Fluids not considered to be part of the empty
weight of the aircraft are potable (drinkable) water, lavatory
precharge water, and water for injection into the engines.

Figure 3-5. Locating the CG of an airplane relative to the datum.
Weighing point
Net weight (lb)
TARE weight (lb)
Scale reading (lb)
Arm (in)
Moment (lb-in)
CG
−32.0
Right side
Left side
Nose
Total
2,006
38,180
38,456
−10,880
65,756
Configuration of the Aircraf
Consult the aircraft service manual regarding position of
the landing gear shock struts and the control surfaces for
weighing. When weighing a helicopter, the main rotor must
be in its correct position.
Jacking the Aircraft
Aircraft are often weighed by rolling them onto ramps in
which load cells are embedded. This eliminates the problems
associated with jacking the aircraft off the ground. However,
many aircraft are weighed by jacking the aircraft up and then
lowering them onto scales or load cells.
Extra care must be used when raising an aircraft on jacks for
weighing. If the aircraft has spring steel landing gear and it
is jacked at the wheel, the landing gear will slide inward as
the weight is taken off of the tire, and care must be taken to
prevent the jack from tipping over.
For some aircraft, stress panels or plates must be installed before
the aircraft is raised with wing jacks to distribute the weight
over the jack pad. Be sure to follow the recommendations
of the aircraft manufacturer in detail anytime an aircraft is
jacked. When using two wing jacks, take special care to raise
them simultaneously, keeping the aircraft so it does not slip
off the jacks. As the jacks are raised, keep the safety collars
screwed down against the jack cylinder to prevent the aircraft
from tilting if one of the jacks should lose hydraulic pressure.
Leveling the Aircraft
When an aircraft is weighed, it must be in its level fligh
attitude so that all of the components are at their correct
distance from the datum. This attitude is determined by
information in the TCDS. Some aircraft require a plumb line
to be dropped from a specifiedlocation so that the point of the
weight (the bob) hangs directly above an identifiable point.
Others specify that a spirit level be placed across two leveling
lugs, often special screws on the outside of the fuselage. Other
aircraft call for a spirit level to be placed on the upper door sill.
Lateral level is not specified for all light aircraft, but
provisions are normally made on helicopters for determining
both longitudinal and lateral level. This may be done by
built-in leveling indicators, or by a plumb bob that shows the
conditions of both longitudinal and lateral level.
The actual adjustments to level the aircraft using load cells
are made with the jacks. When weighing from the wheels,
leveling is normally done by adjusting the air pressure in the
nosewheel shock strut.
Safety Considerations
Special precautions must be taken when raising an aircraft
on jacks.
1.
Stress plates must be installed under the jack pads if
the manufacturer specifies them
2.
If anyone is required to be in the aircraft while it is
being jacked, there must be no movement.
3.
The jacks must be straight under the jack pads before
beginning to raise the aircraft.
4.
All jacks must be raised simultaneously and the safety
devices are against the jack cylinder to prevent the
aircraft tipping if any jack should lose pressure. Not
all jacks have screw down collars, some use drop pins
or friction locks.
Determining the CG
When the aircraft is in its level flight attitude, drop a plumb
line from the datum and make a mark on the hangar floor
below the tip of the bob. Draw a chalk line through this point
parallel to the longitudinal axis of the aircraft.
Then, draw lateral lines between the actual weighing
points for the main wheels, and make a mark along the
longitudinal line at the weighing point for the nosewheel
or the tailwheel. These lines and marks on the floor allow
accurate measurements between the datum and the weighting
points to determine their arms.
Determine the CG by adding the weight and moment of
each weighing point to determine the total weight and total
moment. Then, divide the total moment by the total weight
to determine the CG relative to the datum. As an example of
locating the CG with respect to the datum, which in this case
is the firewall, consider the tricycle landing gear airplane as
detailed in the Figure 3-5 table and illustrated in Figure 3-6.
When the airplane is on the scales with the parking brakes

Figure 3-9. Determining the CG with datum forward of an airplane
with nosewheel landing gear.
CG
F × L
W
= D −
= 128 −
=
( )
340 × 78
2,006
( )
Figure 3-8. The datum is 100 inches forward of the wing root
leading edge.
D = 128.0
Datum
L = 78.0
Figure 3-10. The datum is aft of the main wheels at the wing
trailing edge.
D = 75
Datum
L = 78.0
Figure 3-7. Determining the CG.
CG
Total moment
Total weight
=
65,756
2,006
=
32.8 inches behind the datum
=
Figure 3-6. The datum is located at the firewall.
Datum
off, place chocks around the wheels to keep the airplane
from rolling. Subtract the weight of the chocks, called tare
weight, from the scale reading to determine the net weight
at each weighing point. Multiply each net weight by its arm
to determine its moment, and then determine the total weight
and total moment. The CG is determined by dividing the total
moment by the total weight. [Figure 3-7]
The airplane illustrated in Figures 3-5 and 3-6 has a net
weight of 2,006 pounds, and its CG is 32.8 inches behind
the datum.
EWCG Formulas
A chart such as the one in Figure 3-5 helps the pilot visualize
the weights, arms, and moments when solving an EWCG
problem, but it is quicker to determine the EWCG by using
formulas and an electronic calculator. The use of a calculator
for solving these problems is described in Chapter 8, Use of
Computers in Weight and Balance Computations.
There are four possible conditions and their formulas that
relate the location of CG to the datum. Notice that the
formula for each condition first determines the moment of
the nosewheel or tailwheel and then divides it by the total
weight of the airplane. The arm thus determined is then added
to or subtracted from the distance between the main wheels
and the datum, distance D.
Datum Forward of the Airplane—Nosewheel
Landing Gear
The datum of the airplane in Figure 3-8 is 100 inches forward
of the leading edge of the wing root or 128 inches forward
of the main-wheel weighing points. This is distance (D). The
weight of the nosewheel (F) is 340 pounds, and the distance
between main wheels and nosewheel (L) is 78 inches. The
total weight of the airplane (W) is 2,006 pounds. Determine
the CG by using the formula in Figure 3-9.
The CG is 114.8 inches aft of the datum. This is 13.2 inches
forward of the main-wheel weighing points, which proves
the location of the datum has no effect on the location of the
CG if all measurements are made from the same location.
Datum Aft of the Main Wheels—Nosewheel
Landing Gear
The datum of some aircraft may be located aft of the main
wheels. The airplane in this example is the same one just
discussed, but the datum is at the intersection of the trailing
edge of the wing with the fuselage. The distance (D) between
the datum of the airplane in Figure 3-10 and the main-wheel

Figure 3-13. Determining the CG with datum forward of the main
wheels in an airplane with tailwheel landing gear.
CG
R × L
W
= D +
= 7.5 +
=
( )
67 × 222
1,218
( )
Figure 3-11. Determining the CG with datum aft of the main wheels
of an airplane with nosewheel landing gear.
CG
F × L
W
= − D +
= − 75 +
−88.2
=
( )
340 × 78
2,006
( )
Figure 3-12. The datum of this tailwheel airplane is the wing root
leading edge.
D = 7.5
Datum
L = 222.0
Datum
L = 222.0
D = −80
Figure 3-14. The datum is aft of the main wheels, at the intersection
of the wing trailing edge and the fuselage.
CG
R × L
W
= −D +
= −80 +
= −67.8
( )
67 × 222
1,218
( )
Figure 3-16. Determining the CG with datum aft of the main wheels
in an airplane with tailwheel landing gear.
weighing points is 75 inches, the weight of the nosewheel
(F) is 340 pounds, and the distance between main wheels
and nosewheel (L) is 78 inches. The total net weight of the
airplane (W) is 2,006 pounds.
The location of the CG may be determined by using the
formula in Figure 3-11.
The CG location is a negative value, which means it is 88.2
inches forward of the datum. This places it 13.2 inches
forward of the main wheels, exactly the same location as
when it was measured from other datum locations.
Location of Datum
The location of the datum is not important, but all
measurements must be made from the same location.
Datum Forward of the Main Wheels—Tailwheel
Landing Gear
Locating the CG of a tailwheel airplane is done in the same
way as locating it for a nosewheel airplane except the formula
is .
The distance (D) between the datum of the airplane in
Figure 3-12 and the main-gear weighing points is 7.5 inches,
the weight of the tailwheel (R) is 67 pounds, and the distance
(L) between the main-wheel and the tailwheel weighing points
is 222 inches. The total weight of the airplane (W) is 1,218
pounds. Determine the CG by using the formula in Figure 3-13.
R × L
W
The CG is 19.7 inches behind the datum.
Datum Aft of the Main Wheels—Tailwheel
Landing Gear
The datum of the airplane in Figure 3-14 is located at the
intersection of the wing root trailing edge and the fuselage.
This places the arm of the main gear (D) at –80 inches. The
net weight of the tailwheel (R) is 67 pounds, the distance
between the main wheels and the tailwheel (L) is 222 inches,
and the total net weight (W) of the airplane is 1,218 pounds.
Since the datum is aft of the main wheels, use the formula
found in Figure 3-15.
The CG is 67.8 inches forward of the datum or 12.2 inches
aft of the main-gear weighing points. The CG is in exactly
the same location relative to the main wheels, regardless of

Figure 3-16. The MAC is the chord drawn through the geographic
center of the plan area of the wing.
CG
MAC
Trailing edge mean
aerodynamic chord
Leading edge mean
aerodynamic chord
TEMAC
LEMAC
Datum
where the datum is located.
Center of Gravity (CG) and Mean
Aerodynamic Chord (MAC)
Center of Gravity (CG)
In addition to overloading or drastically reducing the
aircraft’s weight, the distribution of weight is also a concern.
When aircraft equipment is changed, the person making the
equipment change must make an entry on the equipment list
indicating items added, removed, or relocated; the date of
the change; and the person’s name and certification number
in the aircraft’s maintenance records.
For the purpose of weight and balance computations, the CG
of an airplane is an imaginary point about which the nose-
heavy (–) moments and tail-heavy (+) moments are exactly
equal in magnitude. If suspended from the CG point, the
aircraft would have no tendency to rotate nose up or nose
down. The CG of the loaded aircraft can range fore and aft
within certain limits that are determined during the fl ght test
for type certific tion. These limits are the most forward- and
rearward-loaded CG positions at which the aircraft meets the
performance and flight characteristics required by the FAA.
Any loading that places the CG outside the limits for a
particular aircraft seriously impairs the pilot’s ability to
control the aircraft. For example, it is more difficult to take
off and gain altitude in a nose-heavy aircraft, and the aircraft
tends to drop its nose when the pilot reduces throttle. It also
requires a higher speed to land safely. A tail-heavy aircraft is
more susceptible to stalling at low speed, which is a concern
during the landing approach.
On small airplanes and on all helicopters, the CG location
is identified as being a specific number of inches from the
datum. The CG range is identifiedin the same way. On larger
airplanes, from private business jets to large jumbo jets, the
CG and its range are typically identified in relation to the
width of the wing.
Mean Aerodynamic Chord (MAC)
The width of the wing, or straight-line distance from the
leading edge to the trailing edge, on an airplane is known as
the chord. If the leading edge and the trailing edge of a wing
are parallel, the chord is equal at all points along the entire
length of the wing. The average length of the chord, or MAC,
of a tapered wing is more complicated to define. The MAC,
as seen in Figure 3-16, is the chord of an imaginary airfoil
that has the same aerodynamic characteristics as the actual
airfoil. You can also think of it as the chord drawn through
the geographic center of the plan area of the wing.
Usually listed in the aircraft’s TCDS when it is required for
weight and balance computations, the MAC is established
by the manufacturer, defining its leading edge (LEMAC)
and trailing edge (TEMAC) in terms of inches from the
datum. [Figure 3-16] The CG location and various limits
are then expressed in percentage of the chord or percent
MAC. In order to relate the percent MAC to the datum, all
weight and balance information includes two items: the MAC
length in inches and the location of the LEMAC in inches
from the datum. For the purpose of simplicity, most light-
aircraft manufacturers express the CG range in inches from
the datum; transport-category aircraft CGs are expressed in
percent MAC.
The relative positions of the CG and the aerodynamic
center of lift of the wing have critical effects on the flight
characteristics of the aircraft. Consequently, relating the
CG location to the chord of the wing is convenient from
a design and operations standpoint. Normally, an aircraft
has acceptable fl ght characteristics if the CG is located
somewhere near the 25 percent average chord point. This
means the CG is located one-fourth of the distance back from
the LEMAC to the TEMAC. Such a location places the CG
forward of the aerodynamic center for most airfoils.
The weight and balance data of the airplane in Figure 3-17 states
that the MAC is from stations 144 to 206 and the CG is
located at station 161.
MAC = TEMAC – LEMAC
MAC = 206" – 144"
MAC = 62"

Figure 3-18. Formula for determining the CG expressed in percent
MAC.
CG inches % MAC = Distance aft of LEMAC × 100
MAC
=
= 27.4
17 × 100
Figure 3-17. Large aircraft weight and balance calculation diagram.
CG = 27.4%
CG = 161
MAC
TEMAC
LEMAC
Datum
CG = 27.4%
CG
CG
= 161
MAC
Station 144"
Station 206"
Figure 3-19. Formula for determining the CG in inches from the
datum.
CG inches from datum = LEMAC + MAC × CG % MAC
= 144 +
= 160.9
62 × 27.4
CG = 161"
In order to findthe percent MAC, firs determine the distance
of the CG from LEMAC.
CG – LEMAC = Distance from LEMAC
161" – 144" = 17"
The location of the CG expressed in percent MAC is
determined using the formula found in Figure 3-18. The CG
of the airplane is located at 27.4 percent MAC.
It is sometimes necessary to determine the location of the
CG in inches from the datum when its location in percent
MAC is known.
The CG of the airplane is located at 27.4 percent MAC.
MAC = 206 – 144 = 62
LEMAC = station 144
Determine the location of the CG in inches from the datum
by using the formula found in Figure 3-19.
The CG of this airplane is located at station 160.9 inches aft
of the datum. It is important for longitudinal stability that the
CG be located ahead of the center of lift of a wing. Since the
center of lift is expressed as percent MAC, the location of
the CG is expressed in the same terms.