Chapter 12
Weather Theory
Weather Theory
S|
Introduction
Weather is an important factor that influences aircraft
performance and flying safety. It is the state of the atmosphere
at a given time and place with respect to variables, such as
temperature (heat or cold), moisture (wetness or dryness),
wind velocity (calm or storm), visibility (clearness or
cloudiness), and barometric pressure (high or low). The
term “weather” can also apply to adverse or destructive
atmospheric conditions, such as high winds.
This chapter explains basic weather theory and offers pilots
background knowledge of weather principles. It is designed
to help them gain a good understanding of how weather
affects daily flying activities. Understanding the theories
behind weather helps a pilot make sound weather decisions
based on the reports and forecasts obtained from a Flight
Service Station (FSS) weather specialist and other aviation
weather services.
Be it a local flight or a long cross-country flight, decisions
based on weather can dramatically affect the safety of the flight.
12-1

Atmosphere
The atmosphere is a blanket of air made up of a mixture of
1%
Oxygen
Oxygen
gases that surrounds the Earth and reaches almost 350 miles
21%
21%
from the surface of the Earth. This mixture is in constant
vn
motion. If the atmosphere were visible, it might look like
Nitrogen
an ocean with swirls and eddies, rising and falling air, and
Nitrogen
waves that travel for great distances.
78%
78%
™
Life on Earth is supported by the atmosphere, solar energy,
and the planet’s magnetic fields. The atmosphere absorbs
energy from the sun, recycles water and other chemicals, and
works with the electrical and magnetic forces to provide a
moderate climate. The atmosphere also protects life on Earth
from high energy radiation and the frigid vacuum of space.
Figure 12-1. Composition of the atmosphere.
Composition of the Atmosphere
In any given volume of air, nitrogen accounts for 78 percent
atmosphere have been identified using thermal characteristics
of the gases that comprise the atmosphere, while oxygen
(temperature changes), chemical composition, movement,
makes up 21 percent. Argon, carbon dioxide, and traces
and density. [Figure 12-2]
of other gases make up the remaining one percent. This
volume of air also contains some water vapor, varying from
The first layer, known as the troposphere, extends from 6
zero to about five percent by volume. This small amount of
to 20 kilometers (km) (4 to 12 miles) over the northern and
water vapor is responsible for major changes in the weather.
southern poles and up to 48,000 feet (14.5 km) over the
[Figure 12-1]
equatorial regions. The vast majority of weather, clouds,
storms, and temperature variances occur within this first
The envelope of gases surrounding the Earth changes
layer of the atmosphere. Inside the troposphere, the average
from the ground up. Four distinct layers or spheres of the
temperature decreases at a rate of about 2 °Celsius (C) every
~~
e
her
0 feet
280,00
osp
erm
Th
re
0 feet
phe
160,00
sos
Me
ere
feet
20,000
sph
ato
—_
Str
re
phe
pos
Tro
Figure 12-2. Layers of the atmosphere.
12-2

1,000 feet of altitude gain, and the pressure decreases at a rate
of about one inch per 1,000 feet of altitude gain.
At the top of the troposphere is a boundary known as the
tropopause, which traps moisture and the associated weather
in the troposphere. The altitude of the tropopause varies with
latitude and with the season of the year; therefore, it takes
on an elliptical shape as opposed to round. Location of the
tropopause is important because it is commonly associated with
the location of the jet stream and possible clear air turbulence.
Above the tropopause are three more atmospheric levels. The
first is the stratosphere, which extends from the tropopause to
a height of about 160,000 feet (50 km). Little weather exists
in this layer and the air remains stable, although certain types
of clouds occasionally extend in it. Above the stratosphere
are the mesosphere and thermosphere, which have little
influence over weather.
Atmospheric Circulation
As noted earlier, the atmosphere is in constant motion.
Certain factors combine to set the atmosphere in motion, but a
major factor is the uneven heating of the Earth’s surface. This
heating upsets the equilibrium of the atmosphere, creating
changes in air movement and atmospheric pressure. The
movement of air around the surface of the Earth is called
atmospheric circulation.
Heating of the Earth’s surface is accomplished by several
processes, but in the simple convection-only model used for
this discussion, the Earth is warmed by energy radiating from
the sun. The process causes a circular motion that results
when warm air rises and is replaced by cooler air.
Warm air rises because heat causes air molecules to spread
apart. As the air expands, it becomes less dense and lighter
than the surrounding air. As air cools, the molecules pack
together more closely, becoming denser and heavier than
warm air. As a result, cool, heavy air tends to sink and replace
warmer, rising air.
Because the Earth has a curved surface that rotates on a tilted
axis while orbiting the sun, the equatorial regions of the Earth
receive a greater amount of heat from the sun than the polar
regions. The amount of solar energy that heats the Earth
depends on the time of year and the latitude of the specific
region. All of these factors affect the length of time and the
angle at which sunlight strikes the surface.
Solar heating causes higher temperatures in equatorial areas,
which causes the air to be less dense and rise. As the warm
air flows toward the poles, it cools, becoming denser and
sinks back toward the surface. [Figure 12-3]
a
SS
.
a
—
Figure 12-3. Circulation pattern in a static environment.
Atmospheric Pressure
The unequal heating of the Earth’s surface not only modifies
air density and creates circulation patterns; it also causes
changes in air pressure or the force exerted by the weight
of air molecules. Although air molecules are invisible, they
still have weight and take up space.
Imagine a sealed column of air that has a footprint of one
square inch and is 350 miles high. It would take 14.7 pounds
of effort to lift that column. This represents the air’s weight;
if the column is shortened, the pressure exerted at the bottom
(and its weight) would be less.
The weight of the shortened column of air at 18,000 feet is
approximately 7.4 pounds; almost 50 percent that at sea level.
For instance, if a bathroom scale (calibrated for sea level)
were raised to 18,000 feet, the column of air weighing 14.7
pounds at sea level would be 18,000 feet shorter and would
weigh approximately 7.3 pounds (50 percent) less than at
sea level. [Figure 12-4]
The actual pressure at a given place and time differs with
altitude, temperature, and density of the air. These conditions
also affect aircraft performance, especially with regard to
takeoff, rate of climb, and landings.
Coriolis Force
In general atmospheric circulation theory, areas of low
pressure exist over the equatorial regions and areas of high
pressure exist over the polar regions due to a difference in
temperature. The resulting low pressure allows the high-
pressure air at the poles to flow along the planet’s surface
toward the equator. While this pattern of air circulation is
12-3

1 Square Inch
1 Square Inch
_
1 Square Inch
1 Square Inch
_
7.4
18,000 feet
a
lb
18,000 feet
_
—_
14.7
Sea level
lb
Figure 12-5. Three-cell circulation pattern due to the rotation of
the Earth.
Figure 12-4. Atmosphere weights.
the surface. Then, it flows southward along the surface back
toward the equator. Coriolis force bends the flow to the right,
thus creating the northeasterly trade winds that prevail from
correct in theory, the circulation of air is modified by several
30° latitude to the equator. Similar forces create circulation
forces, the most important of which is the rotation of the Earth.
cells that encircle the Earth between 30° and 60° latitude and
between 60° and the poles. This circulation pattern results in
The force created by the rotation of the Earth is known as
the prevailing upper level westerly winds in the conterminous
the Coriolis force. This force is not perceptible to humans as
United States.
they walk around because humans move slowly and travel
relatively short distances compared to the size and rotation
Circulation patterns are further complicated by seasonal
rate of the Earth. However, the Coriolis force significantly
changes, differences between the surfaces of continents and
affects motion over large distances, such as an air mass or
oceans, and other factors such as frictional forces caused
body of water.
by the topography of the Earth’s surface that modify the
movement of the air in the atmosphere. For example, within
The Coriolis force deflects air to the right in the Northern
2,000 feet of the ground, the friction between the surface and
Hemisphere, causing it to follow a curved path instead of a
the atmosphere slows the moving air. The wind is diverted
straight line. The amount of deflection differs depending on
from its path because of the frictional force. Thus, the wind
the latitude. It is greatest at the poles and diminishes to zero
direction at the surface varies somewhat from the wind
at the equator. The magnitude of Coriolis force also differs
direction just a few thousand feet above the Earth.
with the speed of the moving body—the greater the speed,
the greater the deviation. In the Northern Hemisphere, the
Measurement of Atmosphere Pressure
rotation of the Earth deflects moving air to the right and
changes the general circulation pattern of the air.
Atmospheric pressure historically was measured in inches of
mercury ("Hg) by a mercurial barometer. [Figure 12-6] The
The Coriolis force causes the general flow to break up into
barometer measures the height of a column of mercury inside a
three distinct cells in each hemisphere. [Figure 12-5] In
glass tube. A section of the mercury is exposed to the pressure
the Northern Hemisphere, the warm air at the equator rises
of the atmosphere, which exerts a force on the mercury. An
upward from the surface, travels northward, and is deflected
increase in pressure forces the mercury to rise inside the tube.
eastward by the rotation of the Earth. By the time it has
When the pressure drops, mercury drains out of the tube
traveled one-third of the distance from the equator to the
decreasing the height of the column. This type of barometer is
North Pole, it is no longer moving northward, but eastward.
typically used in a laboratory or weather observation station,
This air cools and sinks in a belt-like area at about 30°
is not easily transported, and difficult to read.
latitude, creating an area of high pressure as it sinks toward
12-4
Y
_
a
|
"
—_
i
_a

the linkage mechanism of an aneroid barometer, it is not as
accurate as a mercurial barometer.
At sea level in a standard
atmosphere, the weight
of the atmosphere
To provide a common reference, the International Standard
(14.7 lb/in2) supports
Atmosphere (ISA) has been established. These standard
a column of mercury
29.92 inches high.
conditions are the basis for certain flight instruments and
>:
most aircraft performance data. Standard sea level pressure
Atmospheric pressure
is defined as 29.92 "Hg and a standard temperature of 59 °F
Height of mercury
29.92" (760 mm)
(15 °C). Atmospheric pressure is also reported in millibars
(mb), with 1 "Hg equal to approximately 34 mb. Standard sea
level pressure is 1,013.2 mb. Typical mb pressure readings
range from 950.0 to 1,040.0 mb. Surface charts, high and low
pressure centers, and hurricane data are reported using mb.
,
Since weather stations are located around the globe, all local
barometric pressure readings are converted to a sea level
pressure to provide a standard for records and reports. To
achieve this, each station converts its barometric pressure by
adding approximately 1 "Hg for every 1,000 feet of elevation.
For example, a station at 5,000 feet above sea level, with a
~~
reading of 24.92 "Hg, reports a sea level pressure reading of
Sea level
YY
29.92 "Hg. [Figure 12-8] Using common sea level pressure
BT
29.92 "Hg = 1,013.2 mb (hPa) = 14.7 lb/in2
readings helps ensure aircraft altimeters are set correctly,
based on the current pressure readings.
Figure 12-6. Although mercurial barometers are no longer used
in the U. S., they are still a good historical reference for where the
By tracking barometric pressure trends across a large area,
altimeter setting came from (inches of mercury).
weather forecasters can more accurately predict movement
of pressure systems and the associated weather. For example,
An aneroid barometer is the standard instrument used
tracking a pattern of rising pressure at a single weather station
to measure pressure; it is easier to read and transport.
generally indicates the approach of fair weather. Conversely,
[Figure 12-7] The aneroid barometer contains a closed vessel
decreasing or rapidly falling pressure usually indicates
called an aneroid cell that contracts or expands with changes
approaching bad weather and, possibly, severe storms.
in pressure. The aneroid cell attaches to a pressure indicator
Altitude and Atmospheric Pressure
with a mechanical linkage to provide pressure readings. The
pressure sensing part of an aircraft altimeter is essentially
As altitude increases, atmospheric pressure decreases. On
an aneroid barometer. It is important to note that due to
average, with every 1,000 feet of increase in altitude, the
atmospheric pressure decreases 1 "Hg. As pressure decreases,
-
the air becomes less dense or thinner. This is the equivalent of
Higher
being at a higher altitude and is referred to as density altitude.
Atmospheric pressure
Y
As pressure decreases, density altitude increases and has a
\
pronounced effect on aircraft performance.
a
|
a
Differences in air density caused by changes in temperature
/
|
result in a change in pressure. This, in turn, creates motion in
the atmosphere, both vertically and horizontally, in the form
eT
BO
Lower
of currents and wind. The atmosphere is almost constantly in
ll
ee
ce
Se
ale
oid
d a
ner
motion as it strives to reach equilibrium. These never-ending
ll
ce
Se
A
ale
oid
d a
ner
air movements set up chain reactions that cause a continuing
ll
ce
Se
ale
oid
d a
ner
variety in the weather.
Figure 12-7. Aneroid barometer.
12-5

—
Station Pressure
Denver
24.92 "Hg
BT
a
Standard Atmosphere
Station Pressure
New Orleans
29.92 "Hg
SN
:
:
ee
New Orleans 29.92 "Hg
Denver 29.92 "Hg
—G
Figure 12-8. Station pressure is converted to and reported in sea level pressure.
Altitude and Flight
is longer. An aircraft that requires 745 feet of ground run at
sea level requires more than double that at a pressure altitude
Altitude affects every aspect of flight from aircraft
of 8,000 feet. [Figure 12-9]. It is also true that at higher
performance to human performance. At higher altitudes,
altitudes, due to the decreased density of the air, aircraft
with a decreased atmospheric pressure, takeoff and landing
engines and propellers are less efficient. This leads to reduced
distances are increased, while climb rates decrease.
rates of climb and a greater ground run for obstacle clearance.
When an aircraft takes off, lift is created by the flow of air
Altitude and the Human Body
around the wings. If the air is thin, more speed is required
As discussed earlier, nitrogen and other trace gases make
to obtain enough lift for takeoff; therefore, the ground run
up 79 percent of the atmosphere, while the remaining 21
I
TAKEOFF DISTANCE
Pressure Altitude: Sea level
MAXIMUM WEIGHT 2,400 LB
_
-
0 °C
al
_
Pressure
Ground
Total feet
altitude
roll
to clear
(feet)
_
(feet)
50 foot obstacle
1,320
S.L.
1,445
1,000
1,585
2,000
1,740
3,000
745 feet
1,075
1,920
4,000
1,185
2,125
5,000
1,305
2,360
6,000
1,440
2,635
7,000
1,590
2,960
8,000
I
Pressure Altitude: 8,000 feet
-~
-
a
—_—
_
1,590 feet
Figure 12-9. Takeoff distances increase with increased altitude.
12-6

percent is life sustaining atmospheric oxygen. At sea level,
atmospheric pressure is great enough to support normal
growth, activity, and life. By 18,000 feet, the partial pressure
of oxygen is reduced and adversely affects the normal
activities and functions of the human body.
The reactions of the average person become impaired at an
altitude of about 10,000 feet, but for some people impairment
can occur at an altitude as low as 5,000 feet. The physiological
reactions to hypoxia or oxygen deprivation are insidious and
affect people in different ways. These symptoms range from
mild disorientation to total incapacitation, depending on
body tolerance and altitude. Supplemental oxygen or cabin
pressurization systems help pilots fly at higher altitudes and
overcome the effects of oxygen deprivation.
Wind and Currents
Air flows from areas of high pressure into areas of low
pressure because air always seeks out lower pressure. The
combination of atmospheric pressure differences, Coriolis
force, friction, and temperature differences of the air near
the earth cause two kinds of atmospheric motion: convective
currents (upward and downward motion) and wind
(horizontal motion). Currents and winds are important as
they affect takeoff, landing, and cruise flight operations. Most
importantly, currents and winds or atmospheric circulation
cause weather changes.
Wind Patterns
In the Northern Hemisphere, the flow of air from areas of
high to low pressure is deflected to the right and produces
a clockwise circulation around an area of high pressure.
This is known as anticyclonic circulation. The opposite
is true of low-pressure areas; the air flows toward a low
and is deflected to create a counterclockwise or cyclonic
circulation. [Figure 12-10]
High-pressure systems are generally areas of dry, descending
air. Good weather is typically associated with high-pressure
systems for this reason. Conversely, air flows into a low-
pressure area to replace rising air. This air usually brings
increasing cloudiness and precipitation. Thus, bad weather
is commonly associated with areas of low pressure.
A good understanding of high- and low-pressure wind patterns
can be of great help when planning a flight because a pilot can
take advantage of beneficial tailwinds. [Figure 12-11] When
planning a flight from west to east, favorable winds would
be encountered along the northern side of a high-pressure
system or the southern side of a low-pressure system. On
the return flight, the most favorable winds would be along
the southern side of the same high-pressure system or the
northern side of a low-pressure system. An added advantage
—
a
Figure 12-10. Circulation pattern about areas of high and low
pressure.
is a better understanding of what type of weather to expect
in a given area along a route of flight based on the prevailing
areas of highs and lows.
While the theory of circulation and wind patterns is accurate for
large scale atmospheric circulation, it does not take into account
changes to the circulation on a local scale. Local conditions,
geological features, and other anomalies can change the wind
direction and speed close to the Earth’s surface.
Convective Currents
Plowed ground, rocks, sand, and barren land absorb solar
energy quickly and can therefore give off a large amount
of heat; whereas, water, trees, and other areas of vegetation
tend to more slowly absorb heat and give off heat. The
resulting uneven heating of the air creates small areas of
local circulation called convective currents.
Convective currents cause the bumpy, turbulent air sometimes
experienced when flying at lower altitudes during warmer
weather. On a low-altitude flight over varying surfaces,
updrafts are likely to occur over pavement or barren places,
and downdrafts often occur over water or expansive areas
of vegetation like a group of trees. Typically, these turbulent
conditions can be avoided by flying at higher altitudes, even
above cumulus cloud layers. [Figure 12-12]
Convective currents are particularly noticeable in areas with a
land mass directly adjacent to a large body of water, such as an
ocean, large lake, or other appreciable area of water. During
the day, land heats faster than water, so the air over the land
becomes warmer and less dense. It rises and is replaced by
12-7

.
ae
Figure 12-11. Favorable winds near a high pressure system.
oT
Figure 12-12. Convective turbulence avoidance.
cooler, denser air flowing in from over the water. This causes
an onshore wind called a sea breeze. Conversely, at night land
cools faster than water, as does the corresponding air. In this
case, the warmer air over the water rises and is replaced by
the cooler, denser air from the land, creating an offshore wind
called a land breeze. This reverses the local wind circulation
pattern. Convective currents can occur anywhere there is an
uneven heating of the Earth’s surface. [Figure 12-13]
Convective currents close to the ground can affect a pilot’s
ability to control the aircraft. For example, on final approach,
the rising air from terrain devoid of vegetation sometimes
produces a ballooning effect that can cause a pilot to overshoot
the intended landing spot. On the other hand, an approach over
a large body of water or an area of thick vegetation tends to
create a sinking effect that can cause an unwary pilot to land
short of the intended landing spot. [Figure 12-14]
12-8
|
Effect of Obstructions on Wind
Another atmospheric hazard exists that can create problems
for pilots. Obstructions on the ground affect the flow of
wind and can be an unseen danger. Ground topography and
large buildings can break up the flow of the wind and create
wind gusts that change rapidly in direction and speed. These
obstructions range from man-made structures, like hangars,
to large natural obstructions, such as mountains, bluffs, or
canyons. It is especially important to be vigilant when flying
in or out of airports that have large buildings or natural
obstructions located near the runway. [Figure 12-15]
The intensity of the turbulence associated with ground
obstructions depends on the size of the obstacle and the
primary velocity of the wind. This can affect the takeoff and
landing performance of any aircraft and can present a very
serious hazard. During the landing phase of flight, an aircraft
,
™—.
>»
<<
r |

e
SO
Return flow
al
Warm
Cool
—E
Sea breeze
Return flow
_
Warm
Cool
——
Land breeze
|
Figure 12-13. Sea breeze and land breeze wind circulation patterns.
ol
C
o
si
g
nk
in
_
a
ir
W
m
ar
ng
ri
si
a
ir
a
Intended Flight path
—_—_
——
Figure 12-14. Currents generated by varying surface conditions.
12-9

the mountain, the wind on the leeward side does not act in _
W
wit
I N
D
—_
=
~~
,
Z
. |
,
a
oy
» |
_
-
_
Figure 12-15. Turbulence caused by manmade obstructions.
may “drop in” due to the turbulent air and be too low to clear
a similar manner. As the air flows down the leeward side of
obstacles during the approach.
the mountain, the air follows the contour of the terrain and
is increasingly turbulent. This tends to push an aircraft into
This same condition is even more noticeable when flying in
the side of a mountain. The stronger the wind, the greater the
mountainous regions. [Figure 12-16] While the wind flows
downward pressure and turbulence become.
smoothly up the windward side of the mountain and the
upward currents help to carry an aircraft over the peak of
Due to the effect terrain has on the wind in valleys or canyons,
downdrafts can be severe. Before conducting a flight in or
_
WIND
|
at
|
_
.
Figure 12-16. Turbulence in mountainous regions.
12-10

near mountainous terrain, it is helpful for a pilot unfamiliar
and headwind losses of 30–90 knots, seriously degrading
with a mountainous area to get a checkout with a mountain
performance. It can also produce strong turbulence and
qualified flight instructor.
hazardous wind direction changes. Consider Figure 12-17:
During an inadvertent takeoff into a microburst, the plane
Low-Level Wind Shear
may first experience a performance-increasing headwind
(1), followed by performance-decreasing downdrafts (2),
Wind shear is a sudden, drastic change in wind speed and/or
followed by a rapidly increasing tailwind (3). This can result
direction over a very small area. Wind shear can subject an
in terrain impact or flight dangerously close to the ground (4).
aircraft to violent updrafts and downdrafts, as well as abrupt
An encounter during approach involves the same sequence
changes to the horizontal movement of the aircraft. While
of wind changes and could force the plane to the ground
wind shear can occur at any altitude, low-level wind shear is
short of the runway.
especially hazardous due to the proximity of an aircraft to the
ground. Low-level wind shear is commonly associated with
The FAA has made a substantial investment in microburst
passing frontal systems, thunderstorms, temperature inversions,
accident prevention. The totally redesigned LLWAS-NE, the
and strong upper level winds (greater than 25 knots).
TDWR, and the ASR-9 WSP are skillful microburst alerting
systems installed at major airports. These three systems were
Wind shear is dangerous to an aircraft. It can rapidly change
extensively evaluated over a 3-year period. Each was seen
the performance of the aircraft and disrupt the normal flight
to issue very few false alerts and to detect microbursts well
attitude. For example, a tailwind quickly changing to a
above the 90 percent detection requirement established by
headwind causes an increase in airspeed and performance.
Congress. Many flights involve airports that lack microburst
Conversely, a headwind changing to a tailwind causes a
alert equipment, so the FAA has also prepared wind shear
decrease in airspeed and performance. In either case, a pilot
training material: Advisory Circular (AC) 00-54, FAA
must be prepared to react immediately to these changes to
Pilot Wind Shear Guide. Included is information on how to
maintain control of the aircraft.
recognize the risk of a microburst encounter, how to avoid an
encounter, and the best flight strategy for successful escape
The most severe type of low-level wind shear, a microburst,
should an encounter occur.
is associated with convective precipitation into dry air at
cloud base. Microburst activity may be indicated by an
It is important to remember that wind shear can affect any
intense rain shaft at the surface but virga at cloud base
flight and any pilot at any altitude. While wind shear may be
and a ring of blowing dust is often the only visible clue.
reported, it often remains undetected and is a silent danger
A typical microburst has a horizontal diameter of 1–2
to aviation. Always be alert to the possibility of wind shear,
miles and a nominal depth of 1,000 feet. The lifespan of a
especially when flying in and around thunderstorms and
microburst is about 5–15 minutes during which time it can
frontal systems.
produce downdrafts of up to 6,000 feet per minute (fpm)
Strong downdraft
Intended Path
_—
ind
ilw
ta
ng
I
si
n
a
c
e
r
In
cr
e
a
si
—
d
n
n
g
i
w
h
d
e
a
Outflow
—
_—
|
—_—
—_—
a!
—_—_—<C:;:”s
—
Outflow
—
_
OO
.
BT
—_
~~»
-
|
—
oo
re
—___—S——
_—
_—
—
—
_
—
—
_—
—_
—_
~~
|
|
|
|
Figure 12-17. Effects of a microburst wind.
12-11

Wind and Pressure Representation on Surface
Weather Maps
Surface weather maps provide information about fronts, areas
p
an a stee
.
nds
of high and low pressure, and surface winds and pressures
bars me
wi
rong
rs
ba
for each station. This type of weather map allows pilots to
nd st
Iso
ced iso
ient a
see the locations of fronts and pressure systems, but more
ly spa
e grad
importantly, it depicts the wind and pressure at the surface
Close
pressur
for each location. For more information on surface analysis
rs
ba
Iso
and weather depiction charts, see Chapter 13, Aviation
Weather Services.
Wind conditions are reported by an arrow attached to the
s
ar
station location circle. [Figure 12-18] The station circle
e
ob
ssur
is
ced
w pre
spa
represents the head of the arrow, with the arrow pointing
ely
ely
Wid
allo
lativ
sh
n a
d re
in the direction from which the wind is blowing. Winds
ea
m
t an
L
dien
gra
nds.
are described by the direction from which they blow, thus
t wi
gh
li
a northwest wind means that the wind is blowing from the
northwest toward the southeast. The speed of the wind is
depicted by barbs or pennants placed on the wind line. Each
barb represents a speed of ten knots, while half a barb is equal
Figure 12-19. Isobars reveal the pressure gradient of an area of
to five knots, and a pennant is equal to 50 knots.
high- or low-pressure areas.
The pressure for each station is recorded on the weather chart
and is shown in mb. Isobars are lines drawn on the chart to
wind direction is modified by the friction and wind speed
depict lines of equal pressure. These lines result in a pattern
decreases due to friction with the surface. At levels 2,000 to
that reveals the pressure gradient or change in pressure over
3,000 feet above the surface, however, the speed is greater
distance. [Figure 12-19] Isobars are similar to contour lines
and the direction becomes more parallel to the isobars.
on a topographic map that indicate terrain altitudes and
slope steepness. For example, isobars that are closely spaced
Generally, the wind 2,000 feet above ground level (AGL) is
indicate a steep pressure gradient and strong winds prevail.
20° to 40° to the right of surface winds, and the wind speed is
Shallow gradients, on the other hand, are represented by
greater. The change of wind direction is greatest over rough
isobars that are spaced far apart and are indicative of light
terrain and least over flat surfaces, such as open water. In the
winds. Isobars help identify low- and high-pressure systems,
absence of winds aloft information, this rule of thumb allows
as well as the location of ridges and troughs. A high is an
for a rough estimate of the wind conditions a few thousand
area of high pressure surrounded by lower pressure; a low
feet above the surface.
is an area of low pressure surrounded by higher pressure. A
Atmospheric Stability
ridge is an elongated area of high pressure, and a trough is
an elongated area of low pressure.
The stability of the atmosphere depends on its ability to
resist vertical motion. A stable atmosphere makes vertical
Isobars furnish valuable information about winds in the first
movement difficult, and small vertical disturbances dampen
few thousand feet above the surface. Close to the ground,
out and disappear. In an unstable atmosphere, small vertical air
movements tend to become larger, resulting in turbulent airflow
Calm
NW/5 kts
SW/20 kts
and convective activity. Instability can lead to significant
turbulence, extensive vertical clouds, and severe weather.
Rising air expands and cools due to the decrease in air
pressure as altitude increases. The opposite is true of
N/50 kts
W/105 kts
E/35 kts
descending air; as atmospheric pressure increases, the
temperature of descending air increases as it is compressed.
Adiabatic heating and adiabatic cooling are terms used to
describe this temperature change.
Figure 12-18. Depiction of winds on a surface weather chart.
12-12

The adiabatic process takes place in all upward and
downward moving air. When air rises into an area of lower
pressure, it expands to a larger volume. As the molecules
of air expand, the temperature of the air lowers. As a result,
when a parcel of air rises, pressure decreases, volume
increases, and temperature decreases. When air descends,
the opposite is true. The rate at which temperature decreases
with an increase in altitude is referred to as its lapse rate.
As air ascends through the atmosphere, the average rate of
temperature change is 2 °C (3.5 °F) per 1,000 feet.
Since water vapor is lighter than air, moisture decreases air
density, causing it to rise. Conversely, as moisture decreases,
air becomes denser and tends to sink. Since moist air cools
at a slower rate, it is generally less stable than dry air since
the moist air must rise higher before its temperature cools
to that of the surrounding air. The dry adiabatic lapse rate
(unsaturated air) is 3 °C (5.4 °F) per 1,000 feet. The moist
adiabatic lapse rate varies from 1.1 °C to 2.8 °C (2 °F to
5 °F) per 1,000 feet.
The combination of moisture and temperature determine the
stability of the air and the resulting weather. Cool, dry air
is very stable and resists vertical movement, which leads to
good and generally clear weather. The greatest instability
occurs when the air is moist and warm, as it is in the tropical
regions in the summer. Typically, thunderstorms appear on
a daily basis in these regions due to the instability of the
surrounding air.
Inversion
As air rises and expands in the atmosphere, the temperature
decreases. There is an atmospheric anomaly that can occur;
however, that changes this typical pattern of atmospheric
behavior. When the temperature of the air rises with altitude, a
temperature inversion exists. Inversion layers are commonly
shallow layers of smooth, stable air close to the ground. The
temperature of the air increases with altitude to a certain
point, which is the top of the inversion. The air at the top
of the layer acts as a lid, keeping weather and pollutants
trapped below. If the relative humidity of the air is high, it
can contribute to the formation of clouds, fog, haze, or smoke
resulting in diminished visibility in the inversion layer.
Surface-based temperature inversions occur on clear, cool
nights when the air close to the ground is cooled by the
lowering temperature of the ground. The air within a few
hundred feet of the surface becomes cooler than the air above
it. Frontal inversions occur when warm air spreads over a
layer of cooler air, or cooler air is forced under a layer of
warmer air.
Moisture and Temperature
The atmosphere, by nature, contains moisture in the form
of water vapor. The amount of moisture present in the
atmosphere is dependent upon the temperature of the air.
Every 20 °F increase in temperature doubles the amount of
moisture the air can hold. Conversely, a decrease of 20 °F
cuts the capacity in half.
Water is present in the atmosphere in three states: liquid,
solid, and gaseous. All three forms can readily change to
another, and all are present within the temperature ranges of
the atmosphere. As water changes from one state to another,
an exchange of heat takes place. These changes occur through
the processes of evaporation, sublimation, condensation,
deposition, melting, or freezing. However, water vapor
is added into the atmosphere only by the processes of
evaporation and sublimation.
Evaporation is the changing of liquid water to water vapor.
As water vapor forms, it absorbs heat from the nearest
available source. This heat exchange is known as the latent
heat of evaporation. A good example is the evaporation of
human perspiration. The net effect is a cooling sensation
as heat is extracted from the body. Similarly, sublimation
is the changing of ice directly to water vapor, completely
bypassing the liquid stage. Though dry ice is not made of
water, but rather carbon dioxide, it demonstrates the principle
of sublimation when a solid turns directly into vapor.
Relative Humidity
Humidity refers to the amount of water vapor present in the
atmosphere at a given time. Relative humidity is the actual
amount of moisture in the air compared to the total amount of
moisture the air could hold at that temperature. For example,
if the current relative humidity is 65 percent, the air is
holding 65 percent of the total amount of moisture that it is
capable of holding at that temperature and pressure. While
much of the western United States rarely sees days of high
humidity, relative humidity readings of 75 to 90 percent are
not uncommon in the southern United States during warmer
months. [Figure 12-20]
Temperature/Dew Point Relationship
The relationship between dew point and temperature defines
the concept of relative humidity. The dew point, given in
degrees, is the temperature at which the air can hold no
more moisture. When the temperature of the air is reduced
to the dew point, the air is completely saturated and moisture
begins to condense out of the air in the form of fog, dew,
frost, clouds, rain, or snow.
12-13

At sea level pressure, air can hold
9 g H2O/cubic meter of air at 10 °C
17 g H2O/cubic meter of air at 20 °C
30 g H2O/cubic meter of air at 30 °C
A cubic meter of air with 17g of water
vapor at 20 °C is at saturation
or 100% relative humidity. Any further
cooling will cause condensation (fog,
clouds, dew) to form. Thus, 20 °C is
the dew point for this situation.
Figure 12-20. Relationship between relative humidity, temperature, and dewpoint.
As moist, unstable air rises, clouds often form at the altitude
where temperature and dew point reach the same value. When
lifted, unsaturated air cools at a rate of 5.4 °F per 1,000 feet
and the dew point temperature decreases at a rate of 1 °F per
1,000 feet. This results in a convergence of temperature and
dew point at a rate of 4.4 °F. Apply the convergence rate
to the reported temperature and dew point to determine the
height of the cloud base.
Given:
Temperature (T) = 85 °F
Dew point (DP) = 71 °F
Convergence Rate (CR) = 4.4°
T – DP = Temperature Dew Point Spread (TDS)
TDS ÷ CR = X
X × 1,000 feet = height of cloud base AGL
Example:
85 °F – 71 °F = 14 °F
14 °F ÷ 4.4 °F = 3.18
3.18 × 1,000 = 3,180 feet AGL
The height of the cloud base is 3,180 feet AGL.
12-14
If the temperature is lowered to 10 °C,
the air can hold only 9 g of water
vapor, and 8 g of water will condense
as water droplets. The relative
humidity will still be at 100%.
If the same cubic meter of air warms
to 30 °C, the 17 g of water vapor will
produce a relative humidity of 56%.
(17 g is 56% of the 30 g the air could
hold at this temperature.)
Explanation:
With an outside air temperature (OAT) of 85 °F at the surface
and dew point at the surface of 71 °F, the spread is 14°. Divide
the temperature dew point spread by the convergence rate of
4.4 °F, and multiply by 1,000 to determine the approximate
height of the cloud base.
Methods by Which Air Reaches the Saturation Point
If air reaches the saturation point while temperature and
dew point are close together, it is highly likely that fog, low
clouds, and precipitation will form. There are four methods
by which air can reach the saturation point. First, when warm
air moves over a cold surface, the air temperature drops and
reaches the saturation point. Second, the saturation point may
be reached when cold air and warm air mix. Third, when air
cools at night through contact with the cooler ground, air
reaches its saturation point. The fourth method occurs when
air is lifted or is forced upward in the atmosphere.
As air rises, it uses heat energy to expand. As a result, the rising
air loses heat rapidly. Unsaturated air loses heat at a rate of
3.0 °C (5.4 °F) for every 1,000 feet of altitude gain. No matter
what causes the air to reach its saturation point, saturated air
brings clouds, rain, and other critical weather situations.

Dew and Frost
On cool, clear, calm nights, the temperature of the ground
and objects on the surface can cause temperatures of the
surrounding air to drop below the dew point. When this
occurs, the moisture in the air condenses and deposits itself on
the ground, buildings, and other objects like cars and aircraft.
This moisture is known as dew and sometimes can be seen
on grass and other objects in the morning. If the temperature
is below freezing, the moisture is deposited in the form of
frost. While dew poses no threat to an aircraft, frost poses a
definite flight safety hazard. Frost disrupts the flow of air over
the wing and can drastically reduce the production of lift. It
also increases drag, which when combined with lowered lift
production, can adversely affect the ability to take off. An
aircraft must be thoroughly cleaned and free of frost prior
to beginning a flight.
Fog
Fog is a cloud that is on the surface. It typically occurs when
the temperature of air near the ground is cooled to the air’s
dew point. At this point, water vapor in the air condenses and
becomes visible in the form of fog. Fog is classified according
to the manner in which it forms and is dependent upon the
current temperature and the amount of water vapor in the air.
On clear nights, with relatively little to no wind present,
radiation fog may develop. [Figure 12-21] Usually, it forms
in low-lying areas like mountain valleys. This type of fog
occurs when the ground cools rapidly due to terrestrial
radiation, and the surrounding air temperature reaches its
dew point. As the sun rises and the temperature increases,
radiation fog lifts and eventually burns off. Any increase in
wind also speeds the dissipation of radiation fog. If radiation
fog is less than 20 feet thick, it is known as ground fog.
When a layer of warm, moist air moves over a cold surface,
advection fog is likely to occur. Unlike radiation fog, wind
is required to form advection fog. Winds of up to 15 knots
~
Figure 12-21. Radiation fog.
allow the fog to form and intensify; above a speed of 15 knots,
the fog usually lifts and forms low stratus clouds. Advection
fog is common in coastal areas where sea breezes can blow
the air over cooler landmasses.
Upslope fog occurs when moist, stable air is forced up sloping
land features like a mountain range. This type of fog also
requires wind for formation and continued existence. Upslope
and advection fog, unlike radiation fog, may not burn off with
the morning sun but instead can persist for days. They can
also extend to greater heights than radiation fog.
Steam fog, or sea smoke, forms when cold, dry air moves over
warm water. As the water evaporates, it rises and resembles
smoke. This type of fog is common over bodies of water
during the coldest times of the year. Low-level turbulence
and icing are commonly associated with steam fog.
Ice fog occurs in cold weather when the temperature is
much below freezing and water vapor forms directly into ice
crystals. Conditions favorable for its formation are the same
as for radiation fog except for cold temperature, usually –25
°F or colder. It occurs mostly in the arctic regions but is not
unknown in middle latitudes during the cold season.
Clouds
Clouds are visible indicators and are often indicative of
future weather. For clouds to form, there must be adequate
water vapor and condensation nuclei, as well as a method by
which the air can be cooled. When the air cools and reaches
its saturation point, the invisible water vapor changes into
a visible state. Through the processes of deposition (also
referred to as sublimation) and condensation, moisture
condenses or sublimates onto miniscule particles of matter
like dust, salt, and smoke known as condensation nuclei. The
nuclei are important because they provide a means for the
moisture to change from one state to another.
Cloud type is determined by its height, shape, and
characteristics. They are classified according to the height of
js
their bases as low, middle, or high clouds, as well as clouds
with vertical development. [Figure 12-22]
Low clouds are those that form near the Earth’s surface and
extend up to about 6,500 feet AGL. They are made primarily
of water droplets but can include supercooled water droplets
that induce hazardous aircraft icing. Typical low clouds
are stratus, stratocumulus, and nimbostratus. Fog is also
classified as a type of low cloud formation. Clouds in this
et
family create low ceilings, hamper visibility, and can change
rapidly. Because of this, they influence flight planning and
can make visual flight rules (VFR) flight impossible.
/_-
{ee PS eee
12-15

a
Cirrostratus
20,000 AGL
_—l
Altostratus
6,500 AGL
Sa
Stratus
Figure 12-22. Basic cloud types.
Middle clouds form around 6,500 feet AGL and extend up to
20,000 feet AGL. They are composed of water, ice crystals,
and supercooled water droplets. Typical middle-level clouds
include altostratus and altocumulus. These types of clouds
may be encountered on cross-country flights at higher
altitudes. Altostratus clouds can produce turbulence and may
contain moderate icing. Altocumulus clouds, which usually
form when altostratus clouds are breaking apart, also may
contain light turbulence and icing.
High clouds form above 20,000 feet AGL and usually form
only in stable air. They are made up of ice crystals and pose
no real threat of turbulence or aircraft icing. Typical high
level clouds are cirrus, cirrostratus, and cirrocumulus.
Clouds with extensive vertical development are cumulus
clouds that build vertically into towering cumulus or
cumulonimbus clouds. The bases of these clouds form in
the low to middle cloud base region but can extend into high
altitude cloud levels. Towering cumulus clouds indicate areas
of instability in the atmosphere, and the air around and inside
them is turbulent. These types of clouds often develop into
cumulonimbus clouds or thunderstorms. Cumulonimbus
clouds contain large amounts of moisture and unstable air
12-16
ae yo
OM
Cirrocumulus
High clouds
—
Cumulonimbus
-
Cirrus
~~
Middle clouds
—
Clouds with vertical development
Altocumulus
—
_
—
||
a
Stratocumulus
Low clouds
_
—
Towering Cumulus
Nimbostratus
_
and usually produce hazardous weather phenomena, such
as lightning, hail, tornadoes, gusty winds, and wind shear.
These extensive vertical clouds can be obscured by other
cloud formations and are not always visible from the ground
or while in flight. When this happens, these clouds are said
to be embedded, hence the term, embedded thunderstorms.
To pilots, the cumulonimbus cloud is perhaps the most
dangerous cloud type. It appears individually or in groups and
is known as either an air mass or orographic thunderstorm.
Heating of the air near the Earth’s surface creates an air mass
thunderstorm; the upslope motion of air in the mountainous
regions causes orographic thunderstorms. Cumulonimbus
clouds that form in a continuous line are nonfrontal bands
of thunderstorms or squall lines.
Since rising air currents cause cumulonimbus clouds, they
are extremely turbulent and pose a significant hazard to flight
safety. For example, if an aircraft enters a thunderstorm,
the aircraft could experience updrafts and downdrafts that
exceed 3,000 fpm. In addition, thunderstorms can produce
large hailstones, damaging lightning, tornadoes, and large
quantities of water, all of which are potentially hazardous
to aircraft.

Cloud classification can be further broken down into specific
cloud types according to the outward appearance and cloud
composition. Knowing these terms can help a pilot identify
visible clouds.
The following is a list of cloud classifications:
•
Cumulus—heaped or piled clouds
•
Stratus—formed in layers
•
Cirrus—ringlets, fibrous clouds, also high level clouds
above 20,000 feet
•
Castellanus—common base with separate vertical
development, castle-like
•
Lenticularus—lens-shaped, formed over mountains
in strong winds
•
Nimbus—rain-bearing clouds
•
Fracto—ragged or broken
•
Alto—middle level clouds existing at 5,000 to 20,000
feet
Ceiling
For aviation purposes, a ceiling is the lowest layer of clouds
reported as being broken or overcast, or the vertical visibility
into an obscuration like fog or haze. Clouds are reported
as broken when five-eighths to seven-eighths of the sky is
covered with clouds. Overcast means the entire sky is covered
with clouds. Current ceiling information is reported by the
aviation routine weather report (METAR) and automated
weather stations of various types.
Visibility
Closely related to cloud cover and reported ceilings is
visibility information. Visibility refers to the greatest
horizontal distance at which prominent objects can be
viewed with the naked eye. Current visibility is also reported
in METAR and other aviation weather reports, as well as
by automated weather systems. Visibility information, as
predicted by meteorologists, is available for a pilot during a
preflight weather briefing.
Precipitation
Precipitation refers to any type of water particles that
form in the atmosphere and fall to the ground. It has a
profound impact on flight safety. Depending on the form of
precipitation, it can reduce visibility, create icing situations,
and affect landing and takeoff performance of an aircraft.
Precipitation occurs because water or ice particles in clouds
grow in size until the atmosphere can no longer support
them. It can occur in several forms as it falls toward the
Earth, including drizzle, rain, ice pellets, hail, snow, and ice.
Drizzle is classified as very small water droplets, smaller
than 0.02 inches in diameter. Drizzle usually accompanies
fog or low stratus clouds. Water droplets of larger size are
referred to as rain. Rain that falls through the atmosphere but
evaporates prior to striking the ground is known as virga.
Freezing rain and freezing drizzle occur when the temperature
of the surface is below freezing; the rain freezes on contact
with the cooler surface.
If rain falls through a temperature inversion, it may freeze
as it passes through the underlying cold air and fall to the
ground in the form of ice pellets. Ice pellets are an indication
of a temperature inversion and that freezing rain exists at a
higher altitude. In the case of hail, freezing water droplets are
carried up and down by drafts inside cumulonimbus clouds,
growing larger in size as they come in contact with more
moisture. Once the updrafts can no longer hold the freezing
water, it falls to the Earth in the form of hail. Hail can be
pea sized, or it can grow as large as five inches in diameter,
larger than a softball.
Snow is precipitation in the form of ice crystals that falls
at a steady rate or in snow showers that begin, change in
intensity, and end rapidly. Snow also varies in size, from very
small grains to large flakes. Snow grains are the equivalent
of drizzle in size.
Precipitation in any form poses a threat to safety of flight.
Often, precipitation is accompanied by low ceilings and
reduced visibility. Aircraft that have ice, snow, or frost on
their surfaces must be carefully cleaned prior to beginning
a flight because of the possible airflow disruption and
loss of lift. Rain can contribute to water in the fuel tanks.
Precipitation can create hazards on the runway surface itself,
making takeoffs and landings difficult, if not impossible,
due to snow, ice, or pooling water and very slick surfaces.
Air Masses
Air masses are classified according to the regions where
they originate. They are large bodies of air that take on the
characteristics of the surrounding area or source region. A
source region is typically an area in which the air remains
relatively stagnant for a period of days or longer. During
this time of stagnation, the air mass takes on the temperature
and moisture characteristics of the source region. Areas of
stagnation can be found in polar regions, tropical oceans, and
dry deserts. Air masses are generally identified as polar or
tropical based on temperature characteristics and maritime
or continental based on moisture content.
A continental polar air mass forms over a polar region and
brings cool, dry air with it. Maritime tropical air masses form
12-17

over warm tropical waters like the Caribbean Sea and bring
There are four types of fronts that are named according to the
warm, moist air. As the air mass moves from its source region
temperature of the advancing air relative to the temperature
and passes over land or water, the air mass is subjected to
of the air it is replacing: [Figure 12-24]
the varying conditions of the land or water which modify the
•
Warm
nature of the air mass. [Figure 12-23]
•
Cold
An air mass passing over a warmer surface is warmed from
•
Stationary
below, and convective currents form, causing the air to rise.
•
Occluded
This creates an unstable air mass with good surface visibility.
Moist, unstable air causes cumulus clouds, showers, and
Any discussion of frontal systems must be tempered with
turbulence to form.
the knowledge that no two fronts are the same. However,
generalized weather conditions are associated with a specific
Conversely, an air mass passing over a colder surface does not
type of front that helps identify the front.
form convective currents but instead creates a stable air mass
with poor surface visibility. The poor surface visibility is due
Warm Front
to the fact that smoke, dust, and other particles cannot rise
A warm front occurs when a warm mass of air advances and
out of the air mass and are instead trapped near the surface.
replaces a body of colder air. Warm fronts move slowly,
A stable air mass can produce low stratus clouds and fog.
typically 10 to 25 miles per hour (mph). The slope of the
advancing front slides over the top of the cooler air and
Fronts
gradually pushes it out of the area. Warm fronts contain
As an air mass moves across bodies of water and land, it
warm air that often has very high humidity. As the warm
eventually comes in contact with another air mass with
air is lifted, the temperature drops and condensation occurs.
different characteristics. The boundary layer between two
types of air masses is known as a front. An approaching
Generally, prior to the passage of a warm front, cirriform
front of any type always means changes to the weather
or stratiform clouds, along with fog, can be expected to
are imminent.
form along the frontal boundary. In the summer months,
cumulonimbus clouds (thunderstorms) are likely to develop.
a
_
Standard air mass abbreviations: arctic (A), continental polar (cP),
A
maritime polar (mP), continental tropical (cT), and maritime tropical
(mT).
cP
mP
mP
mT
=
_
mT
cT
mT
Figure 12-23. North American air mass source regions.
12-18

steadily from the inflow of relatively warmer air. For the most
Symbols for surface fronts and other significant lines
part, the dew point remains steady and the pressure levels off.
shown on the surface analysis chart
After the passage of a warm front, stratocumulus clouds
Warm front (red)*
predominate and rain showers are possible. The visibility
eventually improves, but hazy conditions may exist for a
Cold front (blue)*
short period after passage. The wind blows from the south-
Stationary front (red/blue)*
southwest. With warming temperatures, the dew point
rises and then levels off. There is generally a slight rise in
Occluded front (purple)*
barometric pressure, followed by a decrease of barometric
* Note: Fronts may be black and white or color depending on their
pressure.
source. Also, fronts shown in color code do not necessarily show
frontal symbols.
Flight Toward an Approaching Warm Front
Figure 12-24. Common chart symbology to depict weather front
By studying a typical warm front, much can be learned
location.
about the general patterns and atmospheric conditions
that exist when a warm front is encountered in flight.
Light to moderate precipitation is probable, usually in the
Figure 12-25 depicts a warm front advancing eastward from
form of rain, sleet, snow, or drizzle, accentuated by poor
St. Louis, Missouri, toward Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania during
visibility. The wind blows from the south-southeast, and the
a flight from Pittsburgh to St. Louis.
outside temperature is cool or cold with an increasing dew
point. Finally, as the warm front approaches, the barometric
At the time of departure from Pittsburgh, the weather is good
pressure continues to fall until the front passes completely.
VFR with a scattered layer of cirrus clouds at 15,000 feet.
As the flight progresses westward to Columbus and closer
During the passage of a warm front, stratiform clouds are
to the oncoming warm front, the clouds deepen and become
visible and drizzle may be falling. The visibility is generally
increasingly stratiform in appearance with a ceiling of 6,000
poor, but improves with variable winds. The temperature rises
feet. The visibility decreases to six miles in haze with a falling
CIRRUS
ee
CIRROSTRATUS
WARM AIR
———“<“:,
ALTOSTRATUS
COLD AIR
NIMBOSTRATUS
———
ee
ee
ee
ee
Columbus
Pittsburgh
Indianapolis
St. Louis
200 miles
400 miles
600 miles
METAR
KSTL
1950Z
21018KT 1SM
–RA
0VC010
18/18
A2960
METAR
KIND
1950Z
16012KT 3SM
RA
BKN020
15/15
A2973
St. Louis
Columbus
Pittsburgh
METAR
KCMH
1950Z
13018KT 6SM
HZ
Indianapolis
0VC060
14/10
A2990
METAR
KPIT
1950Z
13012KT 10SM
SCT150
12/01
A3002
Figure 12-25. Warm front cross-section with surface weather chart depiction and associated METAR.
12-19

barometric pressure. Approaching Indianapolis, the weather
deteriorates to broken clouds at 2,000 feet with three miles
visibility and rain. With the temperature and dew point the
same, fog is likely to develop. At St. Louis, the sky is overcast
with low clouds and drizzle and the visibility is one mile.
Beyond Indianapolis, the ceiling and visibility are too low
to continue VFR. Therefore, it would be wise to remain in
Indianapolis until the warm front passes, which may take
up to two days.
Cold Front
A cold front occurs when a mass of cold, dense, and stable
air advances and replaces a body of warmer air.
Cold fronts move more rapidly than warm fronts, progressing
at a rate of 25 to 30 mph. However, extreme cold fronts
have been recorded moving at speeds of up to 60 mph.
A typical cold front moves in a manner opposite that of a
warm front. It is so dense, it stays close to the ground and
acts like a snowplow, sliding under the warmer air and
forcing the less dense air aloft. The rapidly ascending air
causes the temperature to decrease suddenly, forcing the
creation of clouds. The type of clouds that form depends
on the stability of the warmer air mass. A cold front in the
Northern Hemisphere is normally oriented in a northeast to
southwest manner and can be several hundred miles long,
encompassing a large area of land.
Prior to the passage of a typical cold front, cirriform or
towering cumulus clouds are present, and cumulonimbus
clouds may develop. Rain showers may also develop due
to the rapid development of clouds. A high dew point and
falling barometric pressure are indicative of imminent cold
front passage.
As the cold front passes, towering cumulus or cumulonimbus
clouds continue to dominate the sky. Depending on the
intensity of the cold front, heavy rain showers form and may
be accompanied by lightning, thunder, and/or hail. More
severe cold fronts can also produce tornadoes. During cold
front passage, the visibility is poor with winds variable and
gusty, and the temperature and dew point drop rapidly. A
quickly falling barometric pressure bottoms out during frontal
passage, then begins a gradual increase.
After frontal passage, the towering cumulus and
cumulonimbus clouds begin to dissipate to cumulus clouds
with a corresponding decrease in the precipitation. Good
visibility eventually prevails with the winds from the west-
northwest. Temperatures remain cooler and the barometric
pressure continues to rise.
12-20
Fast-Moving Cold Front
Fast-moving cold fronts are pushed by intense pressure
systems far behind the actual front. The friction between
the ground and the cold front retards the movement of the
front and creates a steeper frontal surface. This results in a
very narrow band of weather, concentrated along the leading
edge of the front. If the warm air being overtaken by the
cold front is relatively stable, overcast skies and rain may
occur for some distance behind the front. If the warm air
is unstable, scattered thunderstorms and rain showers may
form. A continuous line of thunderstorms, or squall line,
may form along or ahead of the front. Squall lines present
a serious hazard to pilots as squall-type thunderstorms are
intense and move quickly. Behind a fast-moving cold front,
the skies usually clear rapidly, and the front leaves behind
gusty, turbulent winds and colder temperatures.
Flight Toward an Approaching Cold Front
Like warm fronts, not all cold fronts are the same. Examining
a flight toward an approaching cold front, pilots can get a
better understanding of the type of conditions that can be
encountered in flight. Figure 12-26 depicts a flight from
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, toward St. Louis, Missouri.
At the time of departure from Pittsburgh, the weather is VFR
with three miles visibility in smoke and a scattered layer of
clouds at 3,500 feet. As the flight progresses westward to
Columbus and closer to the oncoming cold front, the clouds
show signs of vertical development with a broken layer at
2,500 feet. The visibility is six miles in haze with a falling
barometric pressure. Approaching Indianapolis, the weather
has deteriorated to overcast clouds at 1,000 feet and three
miles visibility with thunderstorms and heavy rain showers.
At St. Louis, the weather gets better with scattered clouds at
1,000 feet and a ten mile visibility.
A pilot using sound judgment based on the knowledge of
frontal conditions will likely remain in Indianapolis until the
front has passed. Trying to fly below a line of thunderstorms
or a squall line is hazardous, and flight over the top of or
around the storm is not an option. Thunderstorms can extend
up to well over the capability of small airplanes and can
extend in a line for 300 to 500 miles.
Comparison of Cold and Warm Fronts
Warm fronts and cold fronts are very different in nature as are
the hazards associated with each front. They vary in speed,
composition, weather phenomenon, and prediction. Cold fronts,
which move at 20 to 35 mph, travel faster than warm fronts,
which move at only 10 to 25 mph. Cold fronts also possess a

Bn.
COLD
_
a
~
WARM AIR
AIR
a
™
™
|
>
-
_—
‘
CUMULONIMBUS
ee
ee
ee
ee
Columbus
Pittsburgh
Indianapolis
St. Louis
200 miles
400 miles
600 miles
METAR
KSTL
1950Z
30018KT 10SM
SCT010
08/02
A2979
METAR
KIND
1950Z
20024KT 3SM
+TSRA
OVC010
24/23
A2974
Indianapolis
Columbus
Pittsburgh
METAR
KCMH
1950Z
20012KT 6SM
HZ
St. Louis
BKN025
25/24
A2983
METAR
KPIT
1950Z
20012KT 3SM
FU
SCT035
24/22
A2989
Figure 12-26. Cold front cross-section with surface weather chart depiction and associated METAR.
Stationary Front
steeper frontal slope. Violent weather activity is associated with
cold fronts, and the weather usually occurs along the frontal
When the forces of two air masses are relatively equal, the
boundary, not in advance. However, squall lines can form
boundary or front that separates them remains stationary and
during the summer months as far as 200 miles in advance of
influences the local weather for days. This front is called a
a strong cold front. Whereas warm fronts bring low ceilings,
stationary front. The weather associated with a stationary
poor visibility, and rain, cold fronts bring sudden storms, gusty
front is typically a mixture that can be found in both warm
winds, turbulence, and sometimes hail or tornadoes.
and cold fronts.
Cold fronts are fast approaching with little or no warning,
Occluded Front
and they bring about a complete weather change in just a
An occluded front occurs when a fast-moving cold front
few hours. The weather clears rapidly after passage and drier
catches up with a slow-moving warm front. As the occluded
air with unlimited visibilities prevail. Warm fronts, on the
front approaches, warm front weather prevails but is
other hand, provide advance warning of their approach and
immediately followed by cold front weather. There are two
can take days to pass through a region.
types of occluded fronts that can occur, and the temperatures
of the colliding frontal systems play a large part in defining
Wind Shifts
the type of front and the resulting weather. A cold front
Wind around a high-pressure system rotates clockwise, while
occlusion occurs when a fast moving cold front is colder
low-pressure winds rotate counter-clockwise. When two
than the air ahead of the slow moving warm front. When
high pressure systems are adjacent, the winds are almost in
this occurs, the cold air replaces the cool air and forces the
direct opposition to each other at the point of contact. Fronts
warm front aloft into the atmosphere. Typically, the cold
are the boundaries between two areas of high pressure, and
front occlusion creates a mixture of weather found in both
therefore, wind shifts are continually occurring within a front.
warm and cold fronts, providing the air is relatively stable.
Shifting wind direction is most pronounced in conjunction
A warm front occlusion occurs when the air ahead of the
with cold fronts.
12-21

warm front is colder than the air of the cold front. When this
and instability are present, the clouds continue to increase
is the case, the cold front rides up and over the warm front. If
in vertical height. Continuous, strong updrafts prohibit
the air forced aloft by the warm front occlusion is unstable,
moisture from falling. Within approximately 15 minutes,
the weather is more severe than the weather found in a cold
the thunderstorm reaches the mature stage, which is the most
front occlusion. Embedded thunderstorms, rain, and fog are
violent time period of the thunderstorm’s life cycle. At this
likely to occur.
point, drops of moisture, whether rain or ice, are too heavy
for the cloud to support and begin falling in the form of rain
Figure 12-27 depicts a cross-section of a typical cold
or hail. This creates a downward motion of the air. Warm,
front occlusion. The warm front slopes over the prevailing
rising air; cool, precipitation-induced descending air; and
cooler air and produces the warm front type weather. Prior
violent turbulence all exist within and near the cloud. Below
to the passage of the typical occluded front, cirriform and
the cloud, the down-rushing air increases surface winds and
stratiform clouds prevail, light to heavy precipitation falls,
decreases the temperature. Once the vertical motion near the
visibility is poor, dew point is steady, and barometric pressure
top of the cloud slows down, the top of the cloud spreads
drops. During the passage of the front, nimbostratus and
out and takes on an anvil-like shape. At this point, the storm
cumulonimbus clouds predominate, and towering cumulus
enters the dissipating stage. This is when the downdrafts
clouds may also form. Light to heavy precipitation falls,
spread out and replace the updrafts needed to sustain the
visibility is poor, winds are variable, and the barometric
storm. [Figure 12-28]
pressure levels off. After the passage of the front, nimbostratus
and altostratus clouds are visible, precipitation decreases, and
It is impossible to fly over thunderstorms in light aircraft.
visibility improves.
Severe thunderstorms can punch through the tropopause and
reach staggering heights of 50,000 to 60,000 feet depending
Thunderstorms
on latitude. Flying under thunderstorms can subject aircraft
to rain, hail, damaging lightning, and violent turbulence.
A thunderstorm makes its way through three distinct stages
A good rule of thumb is to circumnavigate thunderstorms
before dissipating. It begins with the cumulus stage, in
identified as severe or giving an extreme radar echo by at
which lifting action of the air begins. If sufficient moisture
y
—
CIRRUS
WARM AIR
ee”
CIRROSTRATUS
_—
CUMULONIMBUS
——
ALTOSTRATUS
_
™
COLD AIR
NIMBOSTRATUS
COLD AIR
ee
ee
ee
Oe
REE
Columbus
Pittsburgh
Indianapolis
St. Louis
200 miles
400 miles
600 miles
METAR KSTL
1950Z
31023G40KT 8SM
SCT035
05/M03
A2976
METAR KIND
1950Z
29028G45KT 1/2SM
TSRAGR
VV005
18/16
A2970
METAR KCMH
1950Z
16017KT
2SM
BR
OVC080
11/10
A2970
Indianapolis
St. Louis
Columbus
Pittsburgh
METAR KPIT
1950Z
13012KT
75SM
BKN130
08/04
A3012
Figure 12-27. Occluded front cross-section with a weather chart depiction and associated METAR.
12-22

Cumulus Stage (3–5 mile height)
Mature Stage (5–10 mile height)
Dissipating Stage (5–7 mile height)
|
—
40,000 ft.
yy
——
Equilibrium level
:
30,000 ft.
™
=
™
_
20,000 ft.
a
“Ss
0 °C
™
a
32 °F
10,000 ft.
_
|
5,000 ft.
.
_
"|
_
Figure 12-28. Life cycle of a thunderstorm.
Squall Line
least 20 nautical miles (NM) since hail may fall for miles
outside of the clouds. If flying around a thunderstorm is not
A squall line is a narrow band of active thunderstorms. Often
an option, stay on the ground until it passes.
it develops on or ahead of a cold front in moist, unstable
air, but it may develop in unstable air far removed from
For a thunderstorm to form, the air must have sufficient water
any front. The line may be too long to detour easily and too
vapor, an unstable lapse rate, and an initial lifting action to
wide and severe to penetrate. It often contains steady-state
start the storm process. Some storms occur at random in
thunderstorms and presents the single most intense weather
unstable air, last for only an hour or two, and produce only
hazard to aircraft. It usually forms rapidly, generally reaching
moderate wind gusts and rainfall. These are known as air
maximum intensity during the late afternoon and the first
mass thunderstorms and are generally a result of surface
few hours of darkness.
heating. Steady-state thunderstorms are associated with
weather systems. Fronts, converging winds, and troughs
Tornadoes
aloft force upward motion spawning these storms that often
The most violent thunderstorms draw air into their cloud
form into squall lines. In the mature stage, updrafts become
bases with great vigor. If the incoming air has any initial
stronger and last much longer than in air mass storms, hence
rotating motion, it often forms an extremely concentrated
the name steady state. [Figure 12-29]
vortex from the surface well into the cloud. Meteorologists
have estimated that wind in such a vortex can exceed 200
Knowledge of thunderstorms and the hazards associated with
knots with pressure inside the vortex quite low. The strong
them is critical to the safety of flight.
winds gather dust and debris and the low pressure generates
a funnel-shaped cloud extending downward from the
Hazards
cumulonimbus base. If the cloud does not reach the surface,
All thunderstorms have conditions that are a hazard to aviation.
it is a funnel cloud; if it touches a land surface, it is a tornado;
These hazards occur in numerous combinations. While not
and if it touches water, it is a “waterspout.”
every thunderstorm contains all hazards, it is not possible to
visually determine which hazards a thunderstorm contains.
12-23

Turbulence
e~
wn
—_
-
-
Anvil
—
-
Storm movement
-
—
—
i
Roll cloud
=
|
N
Wind shear turbulence
_
Wind shear turbulance
First gust
=
Dust
Figure 12-29. Movement and turbulence of a maturing thunderstorm.
Tornadoes occur with both isolated and squall line
of an approaching storm. Advisory Circular (AC) 00-54, Pilot
thunderstorms. Reports for forecasts of tornadoes indicate
Windshear Guide, explains gust front hazards associated with
that atmospheric conditions are favorable for violent
thunderstorms. Figure 2 in the AC shows a cross section of a
turbulence. An aircraft entering a tornado vortex is almost
mature stage thunderstorm with a gust front area where very
certain to suffer loss of control and structural damage. Since
serious turbulence may be encountered.
the vortex extends well into the cloud, any pilot inadvertently
Icing
caught on instruments in a severe thunderstorm could
encounter a hidden vortex.
Updrafts in a thunderstorm support abundant liquid water
with relatively large droplet sizes. When carried above
Families of tornadoes have been observed as appendages of
the freezing level, the water becomes supercooled. When
the main cloud extending several miles outward from the area
temperature in the upward current cools to about –15 °C,
of lightning and precipitation. Thus, any cloud connected to
much of the remaining water vapor sublimates as ice crystals.
a severe thunderstorm carries a threat of violence.
Above this level, at lower temperatures, the amount of
supercooled water decreases.
Turbulence
Potentially hazardous turbulence is present in all
Supercooled water freezes on impact with an aircraft. Clear
thunderstorms, and a severe thunderstorm can destroy an
icing can occur at any altitude above the freezing level, but at
aircraft. Strongest turbulence within the cloud occurs with
high levels, icing from smaller droplets may be rime or mixed
shear between updrafts and downdrafts. Outside the cloud,
rime and clear ice. The abundance of large, supercooled
shear turbulence has been encountered several thousand feet
water droplets makes clear icing very rapid between 0 °C and
above and 20 miles laterally from a severe storm. A low-level
–15 °C and encounters can be frequent in a cluster of cells.
turbulent area is the shear zone associated with the gust front.
Thunderstorm icing can be extremely hazardous.
Often, a “roll cloud” on the leading edge of a storm marks the
top of the eddies in this shear, and it signifies an extremely
Thunderstorms are not the only area where pilots could
turbulent zone. Gust fronts often move far ahead (up to 15
encounter icing conditions. Pilots should be alert for icing
miles) of associated precipitation. The gust front causes a
anytime the temperature approaches 0 °C and visible moisture
rapid, and sometimes drastic, change in surface wind ahead
is present.
12-24

Hail
Hail competes with turbulence as the greatest thunderstorm
hazard to aircraft. Supercooled drops above the freezing level
begin to freeze. Once a drop has frozen, other drops latch on
and freeze to it, so the hailstone grows—sometimes into a
huge ice ball. Large hail occurs with severe thunderstorms
with strong updrafts that have built to great heights.
Eventually, the hailstones fall, possibly some distance from
the storm core. Hail may be encountered in clear air several
miles from thunderstorm clouds.
As hailstones fall through air whose temperature is above 0
°C, they begin to melt and precipitation may reach the ground
as either hail or rain. Rain at the surface does not mean the
absence of hail aloft. Possible hail should be anticipated
with any thunderstorm, especially beneath the anvil of a
large cumulonimbus. Hailstones larger than one-half inch
in diameter can significantly damage an aircraft in a few
seconds.
Ceiling and Visibility
Generally, visibility is near zero within a thunderstorm
cloud. Ceiling and visibility also may be restricted in
precipitation and dust between the cloud base and the ground.
The restrictions create the same problem as all ceiling and
visibility restrictions; but the hazards are multiplied when
associated with the other thunderstorm hazards of turbulence,
hail, and lightning.
Effect on Altimeters
Pressure usually falls rapidly with the approach of a
thunderstorm, rises sharply with the onset of the first gust
and arrival of the cold downdraft and heavy rain showers,
and then falls back to normal as the storm moves on. This
cycle of pressure change may occur in 15 minutes. If the pilot
does not receive a corrected altimeter setting, the altimeter
may be more than 100 feet in error.
Lightning
A lightning strike can puncture the skin of an aircraft
and damage communications and electronic navigational
equipment. Although lightning has been suspected of igniting
fuel vapors and causing an explosion, serious accidents due
to lightning strikes are rare. Nearby lightning can blind the
pilot, rendering him or her momentarily unable to navigate
either by instrument or by visual reference. Nearby lightning
can also induce permanent errors in the magnetic compass.
Lightning discharges, even distant ones, can disrupt radio
communications on low and medium frequencies. Though
lightning intensity and frequency have no simple relationship
to other storm parameters, severe storms, as a rule, have a
high frequency of lightning.
Engine Water Ingestion
Turbine engines have a limit on the amount of water they
can ingest. Updrafts are present in many thunderstorms,
particularly those in the developing stages. If the updraft
velocity in the thunderstorm approaches or exceeds the
terminal velocity of the falling raindrops, very high
concentrations of water may occur. It is possible that these
concentrations can be in excess of the quantity of water
turbine engines are designed to ingest. Therefore, severe
thunderstorms may contain areas of high water concentration,
which could result in flameout and/or structural failure of
one or more engines.
Chapter Summary
Knowledge of the atmosphere and the forces acting within
it to create weather is essential to understand how weather
affects a flight. By understanding basic weather theories, a
pilot can make sound decisions during flight planning after
receiving weather briefings. For additional information on the
topics discussed in this chapter, see the following publications
as amended: AC 00-6, Aviation Weather For Pilots and Flight
Operations Personnel; AC 00‑24, Thunderstorms; AC 00-45,
Aviation Weather Services; AC 91-74, Pilot Guide: Flight in
Icing Conditions; and chapter 7, section 2 of the Aeronautical
Information Manual (AIM).
12-25

12-26