hours for the purpose of traveling to a location at which the
required inspection can be performed. Any excess time used
for this purpose must be included in computing the next 100
hours of time in service.
Other Inspection Programs
The annual and 100-hour inspection requirements do not
apply to large (over 12,500 pounds) airplanes, turbojets, or
turbopropeller-powered multi-engine airplanes or to aircraft
for which the owner complies with a progressive inspection
program. Details of these requirements may be determined
by referencing 14 CFR, part 43, section 43.11 and 14 CFR
part 91, subpart E, or by inquiring at a local FSDO.
Altimeter System Inspection
Under 14 CFR, part 91, section 91.411, requires that the
altimeter, encoding altimeter, and related system must be
tested and inspected within the 24 months prior to operating in
controlled airspace under instrument flight rules (IFR). This
applies to all aircraft being operated in controlled airspace.
Transponder Inspection
Title 14 CFR, part 91, section 91.413, requires that before
a transponder can be used under 14 CFR, part 91, section
91.215(a), it shall be tested and inspected within the 24
months prior to operation of the aircraft regardless of airspace
restrictions.
Emergency Locator Transmitter
An emergency locator transmitter (ELT) is required by 14
CFR, part 91, section 91.207, and must be inspected within
12 calendar months after the last inspection for the following:
•
Proper installation
•
Battery corrosion
•
Operation of the controls and crash sensor
•
The presence of a sufficient signal radiated from its
antenna
The ELT must be attached to the airplane in such a manner
that the probability of damage to the transmitter in the event
of crash impact is minimized. Fixed and deployable automatic
type transmitters must be attached to the airplane as far aft
as practicable. Batteries used in the ELTs must be replaced
(or recharged, if the batteries are rechargeable):
•
When the transmitter has been in use for more than 1
cumulative hour
•
When 50 percent of the battery useful life or, for
rechargeable batteries, 50 percent of useful life of the
charge has expired
An expiration date for replacing (or recharging) the battery
must be legibly marked on the outside of the transmitter
and entered in the aircraft maintenance record. This does
not apply to batteries that are essentially unaffected during
storage intervals, such as water-activated batteries.
Preflight Inspections
The preflight inspection is a thorough and systematic means
by which a pilot determines if an aircraft is airworthy and in
condition for safe operation. POHs and owner/information
manuals contain a section devoted to a systematic method
of performing a preflight inspection.
Minimum Equipment Lists (MEL) and
Operations With Inoperative Equipment
Under 14 CFR, all aircraft instruments and installed equipment
are required to be operative prior to each departure. When the
FAA adopted the minimum equipment list (MEL) concept for
14 CFR part 91 operations, it allowed aircraft to be operated
with inoperative equipment determined to be nonessential for
safe flight. At the same time, it allowed part 91 operators,
without an MEL, to defer repairs on nonessential equipment
within the guidelines of part 91.
The FAA has two acceptable methods of deferring
maintenance on small rotorcraft, non-turbine powered
airplanes, gliders, or lighter-than-air aircraft operated under
part 91. They are the deferral provision of 14 CFR, part 91,
section 91.213(d) and an FAA-approved MEL.
The deferral provision of 14 CFR, part 91, section 91.213(d)
is widely used by most pilot/operators. Its popularity is due
to simplicity and minimal paperwork. When inoperative
equipment is found during a preflight inspection or prior to
departure, the decision should be to cancel the flight, obtain
maintenance prior to flight, or to defer the item or equipment.
Maintenance deferrals are not used for inflight discrepancies.
The manufacturer’s AFM/POH procedures are to be used in
those situations. The discussion that follows assumes that
the pilot wishes to defer maintenance that would ordinarily
be required prior to flight.
Using the deferral provision of 14 CFR, part 91, section
91.213(d), the pilot determines whether the inoperative
equipment is required by type design, 14 CFR, or ADs. If
the inoperative item is not required, and the aircraft can be
safely operated without it, the deferral may be made. The
inoperative item shall be deactivated or removed and an
INOPERATIVE placard placed near the appropriate switch,
control, or indicator. If deactivation or removal involves
9-9